Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 245 
(BACK) 
 
There has been a recent flurry of interest in ‘the circular economy’. Good. This is certainly an 
advance on simple recycling. But let’s not kid ourselves. Recycling rates declined between 2018 and 
2020, from 9.1% to 8.6%, for the same reasons outlined for plastics. Growth always outstrips 
marginal gains made in efficiencies and technology.338 Moreover, only a small percentage of our 
economy and material use can be bent into a circular economy. “Forty-four percent of it is food and 
energy inputs, which become irreversibly degraded as we use them. Twenty-seven percent is net 
addition to stocks of buildings and infrastructure. Another big chunk is waste from mining…”.339  
 
All of these things: sustainable development, green growth, blue growth, the circular economy, they 
present themselves to us as important narrative lines, which they are. However, if they are not lined 
up and properly measured towards an overarching set of goals that are rooted in the science of 
planetary boundaries (cf. the CUTx Index) then they are effectively transformed into mythological 
distractions from the harder truths. The acrobatics of affirming the small things whilst being realistic 
and purposeful about the big things is tricky. But it is an essential feature of being able to think and 
act with grammatical fluency.  
 
 
We are heading towards 200 billion tonnes of resource extractions per year, and onwards. A 
breathtaking fact is that, at the current speeds, in the space of the next 35 years, we will match the 
entire extractions that humans have taken from the Earth in all the years that we have been alive on 
the planet (roughly 300,000 years).  
 
Or perhaps, to make the limits of the circular economy (and everything else) clear, we just need to 
roll the numbers further out into the future.  
 
Imagine that we continue growing the economy at a steady 3% per year. “Even at this modest-
sounding increment, economic output would double every twenty-three years, which means 
quadrupling before the middle of the century, within half a human life span. And if we continue 
growing at the same rate, by the end of the century the economy will be twenty times bigger – 
twenty times more than we were already doing in the roaring 2000s. Another hundred years after 
that and it’s 370 times bigger. Another hundred years after that and it’s 7000 times bigger, and so 
on. It mocks all the powers of the imagination”.   
 
   
In conclusion, if you have been suspicious or sceptical about “GDP” as the standard measure of 
economic growth, then you have a friend in Jean Jacques Rousseau. If your concerns about bluntly 
thinking of growth in simplistic, materialistic terms are sometimes shunned or met with disinterest, 
as if you were highly strung hippy, then, again, Rousseau would be hugely sympathetic.  
 
GDP is arguably the worst bit of public imagination that we all buy into, simply because it has 
become such a deeply entrenched tradition in our societies. Just like with Santa Claus and the Easter 
Bunny, it can be difficult to let go of some magical thinking, especially if the beliefs have brought 
rewards.  
 
However, the deeply disruptive point of this section was to bring to the surface just how deeply 
innovative we need to be; and for that creativity to be mobilised, we cannot be timid about the true 
proportions of the overhaul that is required.  
 
 
338 Remember “The Jevons Effect” from Chapter 8 for an important dynamic for why this is the case.  
339 Hickel, p158 
