Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 219 
(BACK) 
 
They just wouldn’t, would they? Surely.   
 
There was a key moment in the build up to the American War of Independence. It was a 
psychological tipping point for the colonists; it happened with King George III’s response to the ‘Olive 
Branch Petition’. The colonists had written a letter to their monarch, under the belief that he would 
cut through all the messy, lethargic responses that the London Parliament had made to their very 
reasonable requests for recognition. They believed that the King just needed the chance to show 
true wisdom and leadership…  
 
Therefore, it was rather crushing when he just blanked them. When King George III did not even look 
at the Olive Branch Petition, all hope was lost. Revolution was inevitable. A new geopolitical order 
was essentially born at that moment.304  
 
Although we might be a bit cynical about governments, have we really squared up to the truth that 
they are not just being a bit negligent, but profoundly negligent? Are we ready to admit that we 
could be living in a system of politics and in an economic model that not only permits climate 
catastrophe to happen, but is actually accelerating it?  
 
Conclusions 
 
We must not laugh too loudly at the pomposity of the painting of George III. We should be modest 
enough to note our own psychological conditioning. The limits and disadvantages to monarchical 
rule are now clear to us, but are we prepared to examine our own systems of power and wealth with 
the same probity?  
 
Climate change has happened under the watch of democracy, capitalism and surging technological 
innovation. All three of these things, for different reasons, are wired to accelerate consumption and 
material economic growth. It feels heretical to call any of these three things in for questioning, 
especially given that they have been responsible for so much social and material prosperity in the 
past. However, the emphatic upward swing of all the climate graphs insists that something is 
profoundly wrong with the status quo.  
 
We always need to remain alert to the weaknesses and dangers of different regimes of power, even 
if they have other good qualities (like curly wigs or booming economic growth). We need to be ready 
to challenge them when the common good is so obviously and fatally neglected.  
 
If we do not manage to cut emissions down to dramatically lower levels in the immediate future, 
then future generations in 300 years time will be fully entitled to laugh at our odd enthrallment with 
people such as Elon Musk, whose vast displays of wealth were somehow understood to be for our 
common good.  
 
Cultures shift, but the basic riffs of human psychology remain the same.  
 
 
 
304 A full exploration of this moment of human history can be found in “Paine Tackles Climate Change”. 
Thomas Paine wrote a remarkably perceptive work, “Common Sense” (1776) that is wonderfully resonant for 
the climate crisis today.  
