Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 273 
(BACK) 
 
a) The personal 
Tennyson had met Hallam at Cambridge University, and they were both members of an intellectual 
secret society called, “The Cambridge Apostles”. In this prestigious circle, they met to debate 
questions of Philosophy, Politics and Ethics, amongst many other things. Hallam and Tennyson were 
intimate friends on many levels, perhaps even sexually. There was something remarkably 
charismatic and sharp about Hallam; his brilliance led some in the group to wonder if he would go on 
to become Prime Minister.  
Then, suddenly, whilst on a vacation in Italy, Hallam suffered a brain haemorrhage and died.  
It is a poem that circles around all the maddening memories and emotions that echo around in the 
heart and head of someone suffering from grief. It tries to move forward, like an elegy should, but 
Tennyson just can’t bring himself to do it. Hallam had died in 1833, and 17 years later, Tennyson was 
still adding to and editing his masterpiece. In the end, his requiem for a friend extends into 2916 
lines (divided into 133 cantos, full of 4-line stanzas), and yet, there is no linear move forward, the 
first canto is like the last; and like the ones in the middle.   
The directionless claustrophobia at the macro level of the work is mirrored in the micro level of each 
stanza. Here, at this atomic level, Tennyson did something radically inventive with the format. 
Instead of the traditional ABAB rhyming pulse, he rearranges it into ABBA. So that every four lines, 
the poem is looping back on itself. It tries to move forward, but each stanza is always pulled back to 
where it started. The final word of the final line (A) always brings you back to the start (A).  
“Dark house, by which once more I stand 
         Here in the long unlovely street, 
         Doors, where my heart was used to beat 
So quickly, waiting for a hand, 
 
A hand that can be clasp'd no more— 
         Behold me, for I cannot sleep, 
         And like a guilty thing I creep 
At earliest morning to the door. 
 
He is not here; but far away 
         The noise of life begins again, 
         And ghastly thro' the drizzling rain 
On the bald street breaks the blank day.” 
(Canto VII)  
One last detail.  
Tennyson did something very subtle in the very last line of this extract.  
He tests again the traditional rules of rhythm and style. He is shaking up norms in poetry, in order to 
allow the deep turbulence of his heart and mind to find its fullest expression on the page. In the 
extract above, Tennyson is stood outside Hallam’s door. And in the last line the predictable, regular 
Iambic tetrameter rhythm of “dadom-dadom-dadom-dadom”, suffers a spasm, and we get a 
stumbling, “didi dom dom, didi dom dom”.... “on the bald street breaks the blank day”. Again, his 
grief is invading the very structure of the poem.  
