Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 248 
(BACK) 
 
 
Let’s take these two things one at a time.  
 
a) Facing limits and boundaries   
 
We all accept the white lines on a football pitch because they create the basic frame within which 
sportsmen can express the skills they possess. These rules about these lines have not changed for 
over 100 years, but within those lines, from soggy school pitches to the pristine turf of major 
stadiums, there has been a magical array of remarkable sporting stories; of individual genius and 
breathtaking team efforts, of savvy tactical shifts and late dramatic plot twists. None of that human 
ingenuity and joy would have been possible if the rules of the game were not clear, or if it would 
have been possible to ignore them.   
 
Imagine chess, where the players can choose the size of the board, or the number of pieces. It would 
kill the game, and make it impossible to celebrate the skill of the Grand Masters.  
 
Likewise, we all accept the enforcement of health and safety laws for our restaurants. They might 
indirectly make our food fractionally more expensive, but no-one wants a close encounter with a 
cluster of Escherichia coli bacteria. Indeed, the chefs in the kitchen love the challenge of producing a 
masterpiece of taste, sight and smell in a short space of time, within the small boundaries of a plate.  
 
By contrast, we are weirdly reluctant to talk in plain and simple terms about the planetary 
boundaries. If this is a problem of teacher training, then we need urgently need to address this. If it 
is a problem that is rooted in a fear that describing these planetary boundaries will provoke anxiety 
then there are several problems with this. Firstly, a growing number of children are already anxious 
(more about this in Chapter 14). Secondly, do we then not teach about genocidal regimes in history 
because it is too disturbing? Is that wise? Do we then also shy away from dystopian literature? And 
thirdly, we cannot pretend that our students are regularly confronting difficulties and complexities in 
life, it is essential that we provide them with the tools and experience to think and act in a 
constructive and informed way about them.  
 
Boundaries, limits, non-negotiable lines and stiff laws or rules are integral part of life in this world – 
at practically every level.  
 
Indeed, sometimes these boundaries can be very positive and constructive.  
 
If I give my students 10 days to do a homework, they will do it in 10 days. If I give them 14 days, they 
will do the same work, but wait longer to get going on it. One of the basic classroom teaching 
techniques that helps push student achievement forward is the use of a countdown timer. Instead of 
openly inviting a class to do work through a task, or think through a set of problems, it often 
optimises their performance if a 5- or 10-minute countdown clock is triggered. This framing of the 
exercise focuses the mind and adds dynamism and shape to the work. 
 
Indeed, at a school level, our reluctance, or lack of capacity, to teach the sustainability crisis with 
clarity means that the students are not drawn into more stimulating tasks. By not framing the 
problem properly, by teaching everything in ad hoc bits, there is little chance that a student would 
be inspired to engage in crisis in a way that is transformative.  
 
