Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 271 
(BACK) 
 
However. 
The point is that the overall effect of having such a persistent endorsement of ‘individual action’ has 
only camouflaged the underlying systemic problems. Our preoccupation with this approach has 
anesthetised us from a sense of the true scale of the problem and it has distracted us from where 
the root causes of the crisis are.  
The graph below, taken from a recent research paper by Price et al (2012)366 demonstrates one of 
the consequences of not moving out of a timid pedagogical response to the crisis has. In the graph, 
the level of environmental engagement (“Nature Connectedness Index”, NCI) definitively drops as 
students exit primary and start secondary education. There are many factors in play, however, a 
major reason for the disengagement is that students are bored with being presented with the same 
basic content and moral messaging about the issues.  
In terms of understanding, by remaining shy of the big systemic questions, a gap opens up between 
the brain capacity of the students and the simplistic nature of the content. Humans enjoy 
complexity, puzzles, and analysis – no teacher would survive a Maths class with 16-year-olds if they 
were only ever asked to do simple multiplication questions.367  
In terms of civic engagement, by not moving on from the tropes of ‘doing your bit’ with plastics and 
waste, a cynicism about the political world kicks in. A teenager, who starts to ask tougher questions 
of the world, who can see the systemic links between things, will find it much more satisfying to 
wrestle with projects that are politically informed.  
Human beings are political animals. We are social creatures who love making connections, both in 
our heads and in our communities. Schools must move on from the old stories about the individual 
solutions, we need to plug the idealist and the cynic (both those teenage energies have a role to 
play) into solutions that are systemic. The bulging, buzzing mind and heart of a teenager, wants to 
explore. Being told to do “less meat”, “more local”, “less flying”, “more recycling” is a good start – 
but on (eternal) repeat, it isn’t going to trigger creativity and fresh energy. 
Bargaining is a dead end.   
 from Price et al., 2022. 
 
366 Eluned Price, et al., “Factors associated with nature connectedness in school-aged children”, Current 
Research in Ecological and Social Psychology, Volume 3, 2022, 100037, ISSN 2666-6227.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cresp.2022.100037. 
367 When there is no coherent plan of the environmental content that is delivered to a student throughout his 
years in the school curriculum, what easily happens is that the same basic content is just repeated in different 
subjects (in their siloed syllabus framework).  
