Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 268 
(BACK) 
 
However, in a telling moment, away from the TV cameras who had assembled to cover the event, a 
very senior member of the Commission came out of the building to applaud us for our energy and 
commitment. Then, he invited us to a conference that would be held soon after… concerning plastic 
waste.  
Ouch.  
It was typical of so many people’s reactions, and it provides the background to this remarkable short 
film, shot and produced by former Climate Academy student Katriina Surquin.  
 
Schuman Roundabout, November 2018. Climate Academy protest.  
 
Katriina is/was an unassuming, deeply reflective Finnish/Belgian student. She would be an unlikely 
candidate to grab a microphone. When her group of Climate Academy students organized the 
protest, I didn’t really notice that she was moving around the scene with her camera. I had no clue 
that she was making a short film out of it. Then two days later, at the morning break in school, she 
came to my classroom door sheepishly holding a memory stick. Katriina informed me that she had 
hardly slept since the protest, because she had been so motivated to finish a film that she had made 
about it.  
I plugged in the stick, turned on the big classroom screen, and clicked play. It was a moving 
experience to see so much insight, craft, and commitment in those short minutes.  
This chapter is about literature and anxiety. But any art form can bring reality to the surface in a 
powerful way. This short film is not shy about any tough realities, it is not timid about the big system 
crisis that is unfolding. And crucially, it holds its nerve to insist on systemic change. This is a different 
type of empowerment to the worn-out clichés of ‘individual action’ that many adults think it is 
important to provide to the younger generation. The Climate Academy is unashamedly committed to 
understanding and bringing these big system truths into the public space.  
Katriina’s film was packed with righteous anger, and she had harnessed it with other virtues.  
