Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 284 
(BACK) 
 
The Castle  
In Kafka’s novel, ‘The Castle’ (pub. 1926), the protagonist, known only as “K”, 
arrives in the nearby village after an invitation from the officials of the castle 
to do some work for them. The young “K” immediately finds himself having 
to deal with an unresponsive bureaucracy, and villagers with a foggy and 
oddly passive understanding of what happens in the castle - a castle that is 
always, weirdly inaccessible. After over 300 pages of fumbling around in the 
surreal, alienated village, the text suddenly stops.  
Unfinished. 
“K” never gets to the Castle, there was a fuzz on the line when he tried to 
call, a snow drift when he tried to walk… Just like “K” himself, the novel goes nowhere.   
The original German is full of brooding word plays. The title, “Das Schloss” does indeed mean castle 
or palace, but “Der Schluss” means “ending”, or “conclusion” to something. And the official with 
whom “K” intermittently has contact, is called “Klamm”. Given that access to the castle, his purpose 
for being in the village, and his earnest enthusiasm to do his job is all blocked by a confusing and 
arbitrary system, it is a poignant name, as “Klammer” means peg, clip, staple or brace - all of which 
keep things in place. Claustrophobically, and maddeningly, in place.   
It is true that Kafka was a compellingly dark writer. However, there are some features of “The 
Castle”, particularly in the character of K, that offers us some clues to important, positive features of 
Kafka’s work, that are often overlooked. Sometimes 
the resources for hope and renewal arise in the most 
unlikely place of all.  
b) On the importance of autonomy and resilience 
In her book, “Franz Kafka: Appreciated Anew”,378 the 
philosopher Hannah Arendt is eager to point at the 
nobility of K in “The Castle”. She notices how 
autonomous and determined he is, despite all the 
obstacles. K refuses to accept ‘the given’. He pursues 
meaning and connection even when things are 
dislocated and alien. Arendt celebrates a novel “in 
which the actions of man depend on nothing but 
himself and his spontaneity.” 
Kafka creates worlds where it seems impossible to get 
a straight answer to the most basic questions, and 
most of the people in these places don’t even realise 
how odd and skewed reality is. The underlying 
arbitrary nature of those rules and realities are also an 
invitation to act ourselves in a radically open way. One 
that is not confined by expectation or custom. Indeed, 
 
378 https://doi.org/10.1515/9781503620148-012  
The Opening lines of “The Castle” 
“It was late in the evening when K. arrived. 
The village was deep in snow. The Castle 
hill was hidden, veiled in mist and 
darkness, nor was there even a glimmer of 
light to show that a castle was there. On 
the wooden bridge leading from the main 
road to the village K. stood for a long time 
gazing into the illusory emptiness above 
him.” 
(… soon, after falling asleep in a local inn, K is 
woken up by a polite townsman…)  
“This village belongs to the Castle, and 
whoever lives here or passes the night here 
does so in a manner of speaking in the 
Castle itself. Nobody may do that without 
the Count’s permission. But you have no 
such permit, or at least you have produced 
none.”  
