Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 263 
(BACK) 
 
line of least resistance. They bought favourable laws, policies and tax rules, through lobbying, big 
media, social media and many other key nodes in the system. Or in the words of the thinker Hannah 
Arendt, they invested in “organized lying”.360  
With this network of control, they continue to advance two distinct types of denialism:   
The first is the old-fashioned, loud-mouthed scientific scepticism (something that has found a new 
burst of energy with the rise of populist politics).  
The second is more subtle. It is often called ‘narrative capture’. More specifically, the saturation of 
our green imagination with the ‘individual carbon footprint’, the promotion of ‘green growth’, the 
notion of an ‘energy transition’361, the popularizing of the ‘circular economy’… and so on362. All of 
which have distracted us from the fundamental questions that need to be asked, such as “what do all 
these actions actually add up to?”, “how do we rapidly overhaul our energy infrastructure?”, “are 
concentrations of greenhouse gases decreasing”.  
And at the very base of everything: “what do we mean by growth?”.  
 
being brought against them by the city off Honolulu.  chrome-
extension://efaidnbmnnnibpcajpcglclefindmkaj/https://climatecasechart.com/wp-content/uploads/case-
documents/2020/20200309_docket-1CCV-20-0000380_complaint.pdf 
360 For a fuller view of Arendt’s remarkable philosophy and how it can illuminate our understanding of the 
crisis, see, “Arendt Tackles Climate Change” (2024) by Matthew Pye.  
361 Of course there is nothing wrong with the notion, but just because there are more solar panels does not 
mean that we are using less fossil fuel. In fact, we are still accelerating them. “The Energy Transition” is a 
misnomer. Cf. ClimaTalk article --  
362 As detailed in the previous chapter. It is important to underline that any green initiative is part of the jigsaw 
puzzle that we urgently need to get into place. Minimising our individual carbon footprint is essential, as is 
bending our linear economy into a circular one. The problem is that these  
