Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 246 
(BACK) 
 
5. On Education and Boundaries 
 
Rousseau considered his book ‘Emile’ (or ‘On Education’) as the “best and most 
important” of all his work340. It stands as a classic in pedagogy. It is still a 
foundational book for French teacher training341, and provides the DNA for how 
the much-admired Scandinavian nations set up their educational programmes. 
 
For Rousseau, Education was not just about providing knowledge for people to 
fulfil their basic material desires. Education had to be rooted in character and 
social development. ‘Emile’ is emphatically a book about virtues and knowledge.  
The profound connection between virtues and innovation might not be obvious 
yet. But they should become clear as we take a short tour of Rousseau’s ideas on education.  
//   
At the start of Emile, he asks the question, “how will a man live with others if he is educated for 
himself alone?” and then, “every society must choose between making a man or a citizen”342. It is 
therefore no coincidence that Rousseau wrote his treatise on education, simultaneously with his 
other monumental book, ‘The Social Contract’. In ‘The Social Contract’ he offers a full defence of the 
virtues of a democracy.  Both were published in 1762.  
Rousseau was fully aware of the challenges that arose for any community that wanted to match the 
progress made in technology and culture with progress at a political level. A harmonious and just 
society would require wise investments in its deepest roots - in its education.  
Rousseau writes in the opening to Book One, “We are born weak, we need strength; helpless, we 
need aid; foolish, we need reason. All that we lack at birth, all that we need when we come to man’s 
estate, is the gift of education.” 
Or as HG Wells put it, more bluntly, “Civilisation is a race between education and catastrophe”.  
‘Emile’ has five parts: the first three books are 
concerned with Emile as a child, the fourth book 
 
340 Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, « The Confessions ». Trans. J.M. Cohen. New York, Penguin (1953), 529-30. 
341 Although this says much more about the French reverence for literature than it does about how they 
approach education.  
342 Rousseau, J.-J. “Emile”. Vt.: J.M. Dent; C.E. Tuttle, (London: Rutland Books, 1993), p9. 
