Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 216 
(BACK) 
 
which is the same speed that the gap grows between the North American and European tectonic 
plates.  During Trump’s presidency that speed might have increased a bit. 
The point is that the three-year old in your mind’s eye is gone. It is not like there is a core ‘you’ in 
there, that just got inflated. That ‘you’ does not exist anymore. Shockingly this poses a big question, 
in what sense do ‘you’ even exist now? It is not like that that process of constant flux is on pause 
whilst you read this article. For those interested in following these rabbit holes into existence any 
further, the insights of the Buddha into suffering (dukkha), impermanence (annica) and no-self 
(annata) are a great entry point. 
What the Buddhists understand with such clarity, is that everything is constantly changing. 
Butbecause of the habits and limits of our brains, we fix onto the illusion that they are permanent. 
Letting go of the illusions at the surface level is the key to genuine happiness. 
The global 
Now let’s go big. 
There is the mobility of all your different body cells, and there is the mobility of the coastlines. It is 
true they move about over time rather more slowly, but they move none-the-less. 
If you were hanging around northern Europe in 
16,000BC, an area called Doggerland was really 
the place to be. This is because it was a mammoth 
hunting ground (both mammoth in size, and full of 
Mammoths.) We know this to be true because 
today there are deep sea trawlers that comb the 
area looking for seafood, and they very often find 
flints in their dragnets, along with all the fish and 
chips.  
Between 16,000BC and today, something 
changed. It was a slow change, but it was a major 
change. That change was 120 meters of sea level.  
With the help of this graphic from National 
Geographic below, this ancient landscape can be 
made clear.   
If you would like to travel forwards in time 
instead, you can visit NASA’s website and click on 
their “Time Machine” simulations. There you can 
find the coastlines that will be redrawn in Europe, 
America, and Asia as the sea levels rise in line with 
our future emissions. 
It is a bit of a jolt to our imaginations, but there is absolutely nothing permanent about the current 
sea levels. Yes, they have been with us for a few thousand years, but they do not have to stay where 
they are. The sea is not that bothered about where we have built our cities, it will not politely hold 
back whilst we take the time to reorganise ourselves.  
Indeed, the shape of our coastlines are not just a matter of planetary decoration. Whole Pacific 
civilisations will be lost with just a 1.5°C rise sustained over enough decades. A rise of just 60cm 
Figure 41, Map of Northern Europe, National Geographic 
Magazine 
