Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 249 
(BACK) 
 
In an interesting piece of research by Price et al, (2022)346 demonstrated the teenage dip in 
engagement and interest in nature that occurs, especially amongst boys.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(NCI stands for “Nature Connected Index”) 
 
If the material that we are giving to young teenagers is limp, and mostly a repeat of primary school 
level concepts and action, then it is not surprising to find that as their learning progresses in 
complexity and difficulty in other subjects, students unplug from environmental issues. The most 
authentic and effective way to bring focus and depth to the material is set their learning in a systems 
context. And it is vital that in this learning zone, that the profound challenge of not overstepping 
planetary limits is put as the central hub of the content. This brings into play tipping points, and all 
the puzzles that arise out of our efforts to not trigger them.  
 
The CUTx Index is a powerful pedagogical tool 
that makes all this focus very doable. This is 
because it provides such a clear definition of the 
limits for both emissions and resource 
extractions. The numbers of CUTx provide 
authoritative and comparable data for them to 
visualise the proximity and scale of the problem.   
 
As teachers, we truly understand the importance of a safe space for young people, defined by limits 
and boundaries; and these strict borders and clearly defined expectations are the best environment 
for gaming, collaboration, problem solving and imagination. The more simplicity there is at a 
fundamental level in a classroom, the more opportunities there are for ‘emergence’.  
 
346 Eluned Price, et al, “Factors associated with nature connectedness in school-aged children”, Current 
Research in Ecological and Social Psychology, Volume 3, 2022, 100037, ISSN 2666-6227.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cresp.2022.100037. 
