Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 252 
(BACK) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Anyone with an understanding of the depth of the change required in agriculture would find the first 
panel ridiculous. And it takes some squinting of the mind to even work out the relevance to climate 
change for the second panel. Why pick on these two points anyway? When faced with the systemic 
problem of climate change, to point out only a couple of individual action points, of almost 
insignificant detail, is a lamentable response. The UNFCCC is tasked with pulling together the best 
scientific brains, human and material resources in the world to tackle a global threat to human 
civilisation – and yet these were the two panels that were chosen.  
 
It is difficult to know what causes the bigger brain-melt. Is it just the superficiality of these panels? 
Or is it the fact that so many thousands of people, including hundreds of journalists, activists and 
negotiators walked past these panels without a second thought? 
 
Such a flaccid, limp response is only possible because the actual carbon budget limits are pushed so 
far out of sight.  
 
It is the same at an individual governmental level. Nations are not setting clear and consistent 
legislation that is rooted in science. This lack of clarity leads to a situation in which Research and 
Development departments of companies do not have definitive, secure space to work in. A lack of 
ambition and direction at a government level has a negative knock-on effect for innovation at a 
corporate level. In a counter-intuitive way, many companies would welcome stricter targets because 
they believe they would have the ingenuity and skill to beat their competitors in a tougher race. 
 
Consider the example of the D-Day landings. In the last years of World War II, Winston Churchill 
would have frequently looked across the English Channel on his war room map and seen the 
formidable length and power of the Atlantic Wall that Hitler had constructed. A crossing and landing 
against such an imposing military barrier was an unavoidable move that had to be made. The scale 
and depth of the existential threat posed by the Third Reich was not something that the Allies could 
negotiate with, it just had to be confronted.  
 
Churchill’s mindset when faced with such a challenge is informative. He issued a combative memo to 
Lord Mountbatten on the 30th of May 1942, insisted that his War Office work with much more 
urgency on the floating harbours required for a D-day landing: "...Piers for use on beaches. They 
must float up and down with the tide. The anchor problem must be mastered. Let me have the best 
solution worked out. Don't argue the matter. The difficulties will argue for themselves."  
 
He set clear boundaries, and trusted the solutions would emerge. At the same time, he threw 
enormous resources at it. Churchill famously requisitioned the UK’s civil engineering industry to 
breaking point in order to complete the task. Hundreds of experts innovated their way through the 
fiendish design puzzles, around 45,000 men from varied trades and backgrounds, worked with 
