Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 229 
(BACK) 
 
Introduction 
 
 
The height of the Enlightenment. 
 
In 1783, science and technology were really on the rise. 
  
Even pigs could fly.  
 
Well not pigs, but a sheep315, a rooster, and a duck.  
 
In September of that year, these three unsuspecting 
farmyard animals had been placed into a wicker basket. A 
large basket that was attached to a huge balloon, filled with 
hot air. Not too far away, a hexagonal platform had been 
constructed in the Royal Garden, to give the King and Queen 
(and their noble friends) a privileged view of this remarkable 
event. 
 
As the ropes were cut, there was a collective gasp - and the 
latest human invention rose up into the sky, to defy one of 
the ultimate boundaries of nature.  
 
The animals flew for 8 minutes, rose 500 meters and 
travelled over 3km, before all landing safely.   
   
The Montgolfier Brothers were vividly demonstrating the power of science and engineering. It was a 
big party and a big balloon. Descartes and Newton had inspired people to think of nature as a giant 
machine, and there were many Enlightenment scientists who had started to work out how to 
manipulate some interesting cogs, and how to pull some useful levers. Humanity was really starting 
to cash in on its rational abilities, and to take advantage of its newfound mechanistic understanding 
of the universe. 
   
It was not only Science and technology that was on the move.  
 
As that balloon rose into the air, it created a great metaphorical moment of democracy. With each 
extra metre that the balloon rose, the difference between royalty and commoner shrank. If the 
farmyard animals would have dared to look down, they would have seen the dots of a 100,000316-
strong crowd surging forward, all united in a moment of euphoria and agitation. The balloon had 
overcome a natural barrier in the air, and on the ground, some very significant psychological and 
symbolic barriers had also been crossed too.  
 
Prior to this moment, the King and Queen could only be seen in strictly controlled symbolic spaces. 
There were all manner of rigid protocols and procedures in the royal hierarchy that had to be 
followed in order to get close to them.  
 
315 The sheep was called, ‘Montauciel’, French for ‘Climb-to-the-Sky’.  
316 Some reports put the number at 130,000. Credit to Simon Schama for the numbers and the historical 
metaphor, Chapter 4 ‘The Cultural Construction of a Citizen’, from ‘Citizens – A Chronicle of the French 
Revolution’ (1989), p123. 
