Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 300 
(BACK) 
 
aside because of all the evident advantages that transparent, open government brings. It is not 
because we value something that we then hold back from scrutinizing its faults. The opposite is true.  
In fact, a defining virtue of democracy is its capacity for falsification and development. As E.M. 
Forster declared, “So, Two Cheers for Democracy: one because it admits variety and two because it 
permits criticism.” Forster then adds, crucially, “Two cheers are quite enough: there is no occasion to 
give three”. 
Just as democracies should endorse dialogue and reflection between the citizens, so it should also be 
capable of reflection upon itself. The virtues of a democracy must never function as an alibi for 
reckless failings or abuse. Two cheers, not three. The insights of Plato in this final chapter, will help 
us stay alert to the particular weaknesses of democracy that have somehow facilitated the 
movement of human civilization towards its own collapse.   
Indeed, if we look at the nations who have achieved the most astonishing level of prosperity and 
growth (like the ancient Athenians) through the Industrial Revolution and ‘The Great Acceleration’, 
we can see that these nations are largely democratic. It is under the watch of these UHD nations, 
that greenhouse gas concentrations have reached a critically dangerous level (and they are still 
accelerating). So two cheers, not three.  
f) The Allegory of the Ship  
Plato’s most famous work, the “Republic” (c386BCE) is very deliberately set away from the city of 
Athens, and down by the Piraeus. All the dialogue takes place at the harbour. It was written after the 
war with Sparta, and any ancient reader of the text would not have missed the major symbolic 
reason for him planting his characters there to talk about the world, truth and politics.  
It is therefore no co-incidence that Plato chose a ship to communicate his critique of democracy. If 
society is a ship in the open waters, we would not want it to be controlled by a slightly deaf, half-
blind captain. Indeed, a captain who is also advised by a drunken, conniving crew. Indeed, the only 
person on board the ship who properly understands the situation is ridiculed and cynically 
marginalized as “an expert”.  
The details can be found in lines 488a-489d of the ‘Republic’:  
‘Suppose the following to be the state of affairs on board a ship. The captain is larger and stronger 
than any of the crew, but a bit deaf and short-sighted, and similarly limited in seamanship. The crew 
are all quarrelling about how to navigate the ship, each thinking he ought to be at the helm; they 
have never learned the art of navigation and cannot say that anyone ever taught it them, or that 
they spend any time studying it; indeed, they say it can’t be taught and are ready to murder anyone 
who says it can. They spend all their time milling round the captain and doing all they can to get him 
to give them the helm. If one faction is more successful than another, their rivals may kill them and 
throw them overboard, lay out the honest captain with drugs or drink or in some other way, take 
control of the ship, help themselves to what’s on board, and turn the voyage into the sort of 
drunken pleasure-cruise you would expect. Finally, they reserve their admiration for the man who 
knows how to lend a hand in controlling the captain by force or fraud; they praise his seamanship 
and navigation and knowledge of the sea and condemn everyone else as useless.  
They have no idea that the true navigator must study the seasons of the year, the sky, the stars, the 
winds and all the other subjects appropriate to his profession if he is to be really fit to control a ship; 
and they think that it’s quite impossible to acquire the professional skill needed for such control 
