Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 275 
(BACK) 
 
Boom! 
Geology does not get many ‘aura points’ today.370 My sincere apologies to any Geology students out 
there; but currently, the clichéd image of Geology students brings to mind huddled anoraks in the 
rain, some clutching thermos flasks, some pointing at distant rock formations through the fog.  
However, when the age of the Earth (and the universe) suddenly expands from being just a few 
thousand years old to a few billion371, it really gets the brain juices flowing. Charles Lyell’s definitive 
book, “Principles of Geology” (1830-3) might not sound like a best seller today, but it was mind 
blowing stuff when it was published. Hunting for dinosaur bones and trilobite remains was like 
indulging yourself in the most extraordinary kind of time travel. When Victorian men and women 
walked in Devon and Oxford, they were also exploring the astonishing new realities of the Devonian 
Period372 and Oxfordian Age373.  Whilst holding a brachiopod in their hand, they had to come to 
terms with life forms and timeframes that were dizzyingly weird. 
It was so in vogue that Victorian England’s upper class would travel to beaches, or to known inland 
sites, and post selfies with the fossils on Instagram. OK, not Insta, but it was certainly a very chic 
thing to do. These funky trips were a fashionable compliment to all the reading and lectures that 
they would attend about the subject in their spare time.  
It was all very cool; but it was also rather disturbing.  
The implications of Lyell’s Geology were profound.  
Firstly, it threw into question the authority of the Bible. Why had God not mentioned these crazy 
creatures during his sacred dictation? Missing out millions of years of history couldn’t have just been 
a slip of the quill.  
Secondly, back when Copernicus (b. 1473) made Planet Earth some random rock in a Solar System, it 
was a brutal shock for Christendom. His new model of space was utterly odd: given that his model 
asserted that we are spinning at over 100,000kmh around the Sun, and around 1000kmh on an axis, 
why was every day not a bad hair day? Was God fooling our common sense? Furthermore, humans 
were no longer the centre of attention. Why would God set up a stage for a divine play, only to have 
the action taking place in the Gents toilet on the 2nd floor?  
Likewise, the implications of deep Geological time were quite shocking for human identity and 
dignity. If God made the universe so long ago, why did he wait millions of years for any significant 
action to take place? There are warm up bands, and warm up artists, for major rock stars – but you 
don’t keep the crowds waiting for millions of years. If we are made in God’s image, if Christ came to 
save humans, what was the point in having all those other animals hanging around for so long?  
 
370 Being a Gen X person, I know it is risky to indulge in Gen Z language.  
371 Until the authoritative work of Charles Lyell, it was commonly understood that the Earth was created at 
around 6pm on October 22nd in 4004BC – after the genealogical calculations of Bishop Ussher who had added 
up the different generations of people in the Bible back to Adam and Eve. The length of “deep time” went 
from ‘millions’ in the 19th century to ‘billions’ at the start of the 20th century with the discovery of radiometric 
dating. We now understand the Earth to be 4.53bn to 4.58bn years old.   
372 The Devonian Period spanned 60.3 million years, from 419.2 million years ago (Mya) to 358.9 Mya 
373 The Oxfordian Age was the earliest of the Late Jurassic Epoch, it ran between 163.5 ± 4 Ma and 157.3 ± 4 
Ma.    
