Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 289 
(BACK) 
 
The internal violence of guilt could never solve the problems of the real world, but Nietzsche 
asserted that because the anger had to be released onto something, the most effective 
target became the self. This was due to the fact that anger transformed into guilt always 
reaches its target, causes damage and by internalizing the problem, it gives the person who 
is suffering another couple of bonuses; major bonuses in fact: a sense of power and control.  
 
The dynamics of anger and power, observed by Nietzsche, between the immovable system 
and the weak individual can be seen throughout history and in our modern culture too. 
Powerlessness is a very common and a very powerful feeling for young people today; there 
are so many issues that young people face. The recent publicity surrounding various child 
sexual abuse scandals and the strength of the #MeToo movement have brought to the 
surface how tragically common such profound suffering is.  
 
More commonly, in situations where children cannot mend their parents’ broken marriage, 
they find themselves with an irrational sense of responsibility and guilt. More generally, 
many young people feel powerless when they are faced with the standards set by an 
aspirational society – because they think that their brains or bodies are just not good 
enough. Indeed, for many students, the constant imperative to ‘Enjoy!’ and ‘Fulfil Yourself!’ 
cannot be met, even by the most enthusiastic member of a predominantly consumer 
society. And so, when many young people experience a sense of boredom or fatigue, it is 
also flavoured with a touch of guilt too. 
It would not be a surprise for Nietzsche to observe the increasing number of young people 
who self-harm or who suffer from eating disorders. The causes of such conditions are always 
complicated and particular; however Nietzsche’s insight is a very illuminating one: we often 
find internal solutions to an external problems.  
The push and nudge towards small individual actions as the dominant narrative to the 
climate crisis has certainly been manufactured by those in power to keep us self-absorbed 
and distracted from the systemic change required. However, it is not just a top-down 
problem. There are many tactile rewards in doing something with a visible, immediate 
impact; and in the psychological background to every “less this” and “no that”, there are, 
Nietzsche would assert, the twisted rewards of power and control through guilt.  
 
Nietzsche was a cultural vandal. A philosophical punk. He helps us, not only to observe how 
we might be complicit in power games that are far above our head, but he also challenges us 
to take a brave critical look at our own self. Sometimes, what seems good has more complex 
layers to it.  
 
 
e) Fight for climate laws 
 
The Climate Academy emphatically endorses all of the individual actions that reduce our 
carbon footprints in the world, from less meat to no flying, and beyond. These are all 
important pieces of the jigsaw that will make up our exit from the crisis. However, these 
individual actions require the fundamental groundwork of legal reform. They need the 
leverage of system change, achieved through law, that can bump the infrastructure of our 
lives to a new level. As stated in the previous chapters (especially Chapters 7 & 10) the size 
