Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 243 
(BACK) 
 
 
This prickly truth should not just be a whispered academic fact, or a niche bit of economic thinking. It 
is not OK that this is considered as marginal, ‘specialist’ knowledge, and mocked by most as 
mythical.  
 
For most of the classroom of 12-year-olds who were thinking about Santa Claus, their belief in him 
had just faded or died in recent years, so they could think back to their younger self with an amusing 
incredulity. We reflected on how odd it was that, in so many other aspects of their younger lives 
they were rational and even understood some important scientific things. Yet, oddly, the Santa myth 
had survived. It had been afforded special protection by their brain. The magical belief was held in 
parallel with a huge range of other experiences that contradicted it, but somehow it was left 
undismantled.  
 
Schools and the media should be making the fiction of limitless growth public knowledge. In line 
with the noble tradition started by Diderot, this information should be made widely available.  
 
However, the problem is deeper.  
 
This is not simply a crisis of knowledge and information. Yes, improvements in environmental and 
scientific literacy are always important. ‘Planetary boundaries’, ‘tipping points’ and ‘systems 
collapse’ should be far more frequently used than the words ‘waste’, ‘recycling’ and ‘plastics’.  
 
But that is only the first step. Vocabulary, is only the surface level of a language. What needs to 
happen, and this is far more difficult to talk about or achieve, is a shift in the grammar of our 
environmental literacy. The words Encyclopaedia and Wikipedia both end the same way, with the 
word, “paedia”; from the Greek, ‘paideia’ (παιδεία), meaning education, or child rearing. It is not 
just words and content that we need to learn, we also need to improve how we think about the 
environment.  
 
The invisible assumptions, the controlling principles of how we speak, act and think about ‘green’ 
things has to be different. The grammar of a language forbids certain things to happen with the use 
of words. words I a any just order put in sentence cannot in. Just take the example of adjectives. 
Very few English speakers would be able to list the proper adjective order for more than one 
adjective in a sentence.  
 
So, to be enlightening, here it is:  
 
1. Quantity or number 
2. Quality or opinion 
3. Size 
4. Age 
5. Shape 
6. Colour 
7. Proper adjective (often nationality, other place of origin, or material) 
8. Purpose or qualifier 
Despite this grammatical order being unknown to most, any native English speaker would flawlessly 
pass any test about it when they would put a sentence together. You would get a very strange look 
in a supermarket if you asked for help to reach those “Italian lovely cheeses mature two”. Instead of 
