Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 212 
(BACK) 
 
Reflection Number Six 
Dodgy heuristics 
In a recent study, in ‘Frontiers in Psychology’ the lead author Patrick Sörqvist 
exposes how poor much of our thinking is when we are trying to act ecologically. 
He comments: “Some groups have found that people intuitively think the 
environmental burden of a hamburger and an organic apple in combination is lower 
than the environmental burden of the hamburger alone.” 
Dr Sörqvist, is the research director of Environmental Psychology at the University of Gälve (Sweden, 
although you might have guessed from the number of umlauts). His deployment of cognitive and social 
psychology techniques and methods to unpick the workings of our thinking about environmental 
issues is part of a growing field of research at important level of the crisis.  
Most of our thinking about sustainability, like so many aspects of life, is based on “heuristics”. 
Namely, “Heuristics is any approach to problem solving or self-discovery that employs a practical 
method that is not guaranteed to be optimal, perfect, or rational, but is nevertheless sufficient for 
reaching an immediate, short-term goal or approximation. Where finding an optimal solution is 
impossible or impractical, heuristic methods can be used to speed up the process of finding a 
satisfactory solution. Heuristics can be mental shortcuts that ease the cognitive load of making a 
decision”.297  
The problem, however, with using ‘an educated guess’ to make our decisions relating to climate 
change is that we simply do not have a good education in sustainability. So, when this is added to 
the background biases of our cognitive apparatus, it leads to some thought-provoking insights about 
our green thinking.  
It is worth quoting a full extract from Sörqvist’s article, “Psychological obstacles to the efficacy of 
environmental footprint tools.”298 “While heuristics can yield accurate assessments of the true 
nature of things, when used inappropriately, they can also lead to systematic biases in the human 
cognitive system. For example, people tend to overestimate their climate knowledge (Thaller and 
Brudermann 2020); they believe more strongly in global warming on hot days (Joireman et al 2010) 
and tend to think that larger appliances consume more energy than smaller ones (Cowen and 
Gatersleben 2017). Evidence suggests that people intuitively think that the carbon footprint for red 
meat combined with a side dish labelled 'eco-friendly' is lower than for the red meat alone, possibly 
believing that the low carbon footprint side dish somehow compensates for the environmental 
burden of the main course (Gorissen and Weijters 2016).  
Even if people have a reasonably good understanding of the difference between a regular and a 
hybrid car with regard to the vehicles' environmental cost, they intuitively think that adding hybrid 
cars to an existing car pool does not add to the pool's total environmental burden (Kim and 
Schuldt 2018). It has been shown that people often rationalise environmentally harmful actions by 
pointing out other things they do that are better for the environment (Hope et al 2018).  
One of the primary cognitive biases that underpins these psychological effects of environmental 
footprint labelling seems to be that people seek an average when they attempt to process complex 
stimuli that comprise both environmentally friendlier and more environmentally harmful 
 
297 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heuristic 
298 Patrik Sörqvist et al 2020 Environ. Res. Lett. 15 091001 
