Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 247 
(BACK) 
 
with his adolescence, and the fifth with Emile as an adult in civil society343.  
In Rousseau’s time, for those privileged enough to be educated, the private tutoring they received 
would start with formal education in mathematics and languages at the earliest possible age. ‘Emile’ 
was a radical departure from this tradition. In fact, it remains a radical voice in pedagogy today. This 
is because in the first two books the boy is given a ‘negative education’. Rousseau writes that for a 
child up to the age of 12, “what must be done is to prevent anything from being done”.344  
For Rousseau, Education had to start through the senses, not through books. He writes, “pain is the 
most useful lesson” and ridicules the traditional bookish approach to education where reason is 
stressed too early. He complains, “you begin at the wrong end”345, and later adds with a flourish, 
“Nature would have them children before they are men. If we try to invert this order we shall 
produce a forced fruit immature and flavourless, fruit which will be rotten before it is ripe; we shall 
have young doctors and old children. Childhood has its own ways of seeing, thinking, and feeling; 
nothing is more foolish than to try and substitute our ways; and I should no more expect judgment 
in a ten-year-old child than I should expect him to be five feet high”.  
What is continually emphasised by Rousseau in the first books of “Emile” is the importance of 
establishing a capacity for both playfulness and resilience in a child. Knowledge is important, but the 
first job of education is about character and capacity building.  
In Book Two, we find Emile’s father commenting, “Should he fall or bump his head, or make his nose 
bleed, or cut his fingers, I shall show no alarm, nor shall I make any fuss over him; I shall take no 
notice, at any rate at first. The harm is done; he must bear it; all my zeal could only frighten him 
more and make him more nervous…  With our foolish and pedantic methods, we are always 
preventing children from learning what they could learn much better by themselves.”  
 
The development of resilience that is envisaged here by Rousseau is one that is built up in direct 
contact with nature. Therefore, these early years then embed a love of nature whilst simultaneously 
advanced the skills of problem solving, creativity, and openness. The example most often cited from 
this section of “Emile” is that of a child who learns key virtues and mathematics, through trial and 
error, by making and playing with a kite.  
 
In climate education, we seem to have gone soft on boundaries. Firstly, we do not describe the 
planetary boundaries to the students; perhaps this is out of some timidity about provoking stress, or 
perhaps it is because secondary school teachers are not properly aware of them. Either way, as 
described in the previous sections of this chapter, this is a monumental flaw in our current 
educational programmes.  
 
Secondly, this lack of boundaries, means that there is no opportunity for the students to really 
develop or test themselves in environmental education. Things are just too slack. And this, 
inevitably, means that there is little opportunity for genuine innovation.  
 
343 Mary Wollstonecraft would note that although the education of Emile’s female counterpart Sophie is 
included in Book 5, it is far from an ideal portrayal of women. She would rightly complain that the education 
foreseen for Sophie is for her to learn subservience and obedience to Emile, to ‘complete’ him. Wollstonecraft 
did not understand why Rousseau was prepared to see through and challenge all the social structures of 
society, but suddenly stop at gender roles. In agreement with Locke, Wollstonecraft saw humans as ‘tabula 
rasa’, and then insisted that women were equal to men in their ability to cultivate their reason to define and 
develop themselves. She deserves far more than a footnote for her visionary call for equality in education.  
344 Rousseau, J.-J. “Emile”. Vt.: J.M. Dent; C.E. Tuttle, (London: Rutland Books, 1993), p41. 
345 Ibid, p53. 
