Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 251 
(BACK) 
 
harmonies to their limits, whilst trying to capture the universe in sound. He supersized the orchestra 
whilst probing for the most profound human emotions and drives. His music continually throws the 
listener between order and chaos, hope and irony, as he strains to capture something that is truly 
real and authentic. 
It might be easy to think that these virtues are only relevant to the arts, indeed, this is always how 
we use the word virtuoso. But with just a little reflection, it becomes clear that what Mahler was 
doing to music has parallels throughout the history of science and technology too. All great 
engineers and scientists in their pursuit of new truths and breakthroughs also to had wrestle with all 
kinds of tests of character, expectation, failure and resistance. They had to fight with limited 
structures and traditions, overturn common sense, take risks and be vulnerable to ridicule…   
Indeed, if we take the virtues of innovation into the area that is of primary concern for Rousseau, 
society, then we find the same need for virtuosos. We need leaders with the character to step into 
the social space. Sometimes to overcome boundaries and unify, sometimes to deconstruct and push 
aside old expectations or assumptions. We need innovators who can bridge and synthesize the 
conflicts and gaps between the public and the private, the marginal and the powerful. 
Do we expect such innovative people, in art, science and politics, to come from an educational 
system that is overwhelmingly dedicated to specialization and standardization? Rousseau would 
insist on an education that is rooted in virtues and open to the beautiful, tough, challenges of 
nature. He would insist on a holistic and systemic approach to learning.  
Otherwise, we could only expect to get the virtuosos we need, like Mahler and his music, by chance. 
 
c) It is a global problem  
 
The situation in education is mirrored in the wider world of environmental investments and 
innovation.  
 
At a global scale, it is (tragically) laughable, that it was only in the 26th COP in Glasgow that the word 
“coal” was mentioned for the very first time, out loud, in a text. It was (tragically) laughable that it 
was only in the 28th COP in Dubai, that the idea of “phasing out fossil fuels” was just about signed 
through.  
 
When I attended COP21 in Madrid, it was a time in which Greta Thunberg had just shifted the dial on 
the language used to describe the crisis. There were panels stating, “Miami disappearing under the 
sea is not change”, “75% desertification of Spain is not change”, “143 million people being climate 
migrants by 2050 is not change.”… and after each panel, the same conclusion was made plain: 
“Don’t call it change, call it CLIMATE EMERGENCY”.  
 
Yet, although the slogan for COP25 was “#Time for Action”, the final two display panels summed in 
two short texts why the world has not managed to ever decrease its greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
 
