Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 214 
(BACK) 
 
The global metadata of Instagram is a probably one of the best guides to human psychology that 
there is. Any alien visitation to the planet would be smart to start with their survey of humankind by 
looking at it. Essentially, we like cute and happy, we like smiling and laughing. We like cuddly and 
funny, sunny and yummy stuff.  
And by its omission, there is one thing that is clearly not popular: mass human suffering.  
In fact, we cannot even wrap our heads around it. This is known as “psychophysical numbing”.300  
The term, was coined by Professor Paul Slovic to capture the fact that people cannot connect on an 
emotional level when they are shown big numbers.301 Psychic numbing was undoubtedly in play 
when the BBC reported on the fact that two thirds of the giant ice fields in the Himalayan and Hindu 
Kush mountain ranges would disappear if rapid reductions in CO2 emissions were not achieved.302 
This outcome would critically endanger 250 million people living across eight different countries. 
Indeed, half the ice fields would be turned into bare rock by 2100 if temperatures reached 2°C by 
the 2100. Given that we are on track for about 3°C, this is a big deal for the lives of a further 2.56 
billion humans who depend on the rivers that flow from these glaciers for their food and water.  
"This is the climate crisis you haven't heard of," said Philippus Wester of the International Centre for 
Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD), who led the report. "Impacts on people in the region, 
already one of the world's most fragile and hazard-prone mountain regions, will range from 
worsened air pollution to an increase in extreme weather events. But it's the projected reductions in 
pre-monsoon river flows and changes in the monsoon that will hit hardest, throwing urban water 
systems and food and energy production off kilter”. 303 
If our emotions are so quickly enflamed on Instagram for a furry kitten that is sitting in a box, and if 
we are caught by a sharp flash of concern for someone who is about to land very badly from a short 
flight off a skateboard, how do explain our emotional reaction to this piece of research? Absurdly, it 
only briefly made it into the Top 10 “Most Read” articles on the BBC website that day.  
Professor Slavic would remind us that a significant part of the explanation for our lack of response is 
that such numbers are, literally, unimaginably catastrophic. We are psychically numbed by them.  
 
 
 
300 Slovic, P., “Psychic numbing and genocide”, Psychological Science Agenda (November 2007) 
301 The term is new, but the thought isn’t. Stalin is reported to have said, “One death is a tragedy. A million 
deaths are a statistic”. There is no evidence that Stalin actually said this, but if he did, he was probably quoting 
from an essay written by a German satirist and pacificist, Kurt Tucholsky in 1932. In the essay a fictional French 
diplomat comments "The war? I cannot find it to be so bad! The death of one man: this is a catastrophe. 
Hundreds of thousands of deaths: that is a statistic!" 
302 Sharma, E. et al. (2019). Introduction to the Hindu Kush Himalaya Assessment. pp1-16. In: Wester, P., 
Mishra, A., Mukherji, A., Shrestha, A. (eds) The Hindu Kush Himalaya Assessment. Springer, Cham. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-92288-1_1  
303 Feb 4th, 2019: “Climate Change: Warming threatens Himalayan glaciers”. Matt McGrath.  
