Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 222 
(BACK) 
 
The brightest stars in the constellation of our current value system are: Freedom and choice, self-
fulfilment and enjoyment. Our lives are influenced by these values whether we like it or not. At 
night, when they are most visible, they mark the key reference points of our dreams – and we are 
told what to dream about in adverts, on TV and in the cinema. Of course, we can dismiss our dreams 
as fantasies; we can imagine that they have no real impact on our daily lives. However, just like the 
stars which still shine during the cover of daylight, the values of capitalist economic systems are 
persistently there whether they are clearly visible or not.  
 
Perhaps it is easier to see them by looking back in time to a 
culture which had a different set of fundamental values. 
Consider this famous poster from World War One. “Daddy, 
what did you do in the Great War?” asks the child. This poster 
would make no sense without an entirely different 
constellation of values in place. Imagine an advertising 
campaign today, “Daddy, what were you doing when the latest 
Tesla Model T came out?” Or, “Daddy, what were you doing 
when the 20% reduction on all package holidays to Portugal 
was on?”. Such adverts would be tone deaf to the current 
moral mood. They just would not work.  
 
The poster worked over a hundred years ago. In a time when 
Feudal moral thinking was still the dominant background, the 
poster made a powerful appeal to the values of: Loyalty and 
Order, Sacrifice and Duty. Those who designed the poster, with 
such a clear structural hierarchy that points like a stable 
pyramid to the figurehead of the father, knew exactly what 
might trigger men to get off their seats and join up.  
 
Below is a summary of these contrasting moral values of European culture in a crude tabulated 
format. 
 
 
Feudal Moral Grammar 
 
Loyalty 
 
Obedience 
Sacrifice 
Order 
Duty 
Stability 
Future 
 
Capitalist Moral Grammar 
 
Freedom 
Choice 
Self-fulfilment 
Change 
Pleasure 
Flow 
Present 
 
Of course, the values of capitalism are often very explicit. Sometimes they do not need to be 
uncovered by short reflections in a textbook. Indeed, the morality of capitalism can be found hiding 
in plain sight: a can coke shouts the imperative, “Enjoy!”, Burger King reminds us to “Have it your 
way”, Uber invites us to “Move like you want”, and a bottle of perfume calmy states that it contains 
the Essence of “Joy”.306 In fact, just like with advertising, it is easy to think that we are immune to 
 
306 Or you can get a bottle of Absolute “Joy” if you prefer. 
