Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 226 
(BACK) 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
If I am honest, when writing the lines of the last section on Rosa, I am fully aware of how 
sentimental or unrealistic such a set of underlying values might appear. It would be easy to cynically 
imagine that they are somehow ‘light’ or illusory. We are probably quick to think that they do not 
carry any actual power, compared to the more immediate powers of pleasure and choice. However, 
these are not just thoughts to be written into framed office posters with a glowing sunrise in the 
background; they are not composed to be reduced to pithy one-liners for a fridge magnet.   
 
To seek the resonance described by Rosa requires a playfulness, but it also requires real courage. 
They are not overly romantic views of the human condition; they are born out of a muscular 
wrestling with the tough realities of modernity. These principles must be taken seriously. We should 
If Rosa’s language might seem rather too abstract, then the enduringly powerful short book, “The Art of 
Loving” (1956) by Erich Fromm provides a wonderfully probing and rich alternative. The New York Times 
describes this bestseller as “a major work in the field of Psychology”.      
 
“Love isn't something natural. Rather it requires discipline, concentration, patience, faith, and the 
overcoming of narcissism. It isn't a feeling; it is a practice.”  
 
“Modern man has transformed himself into a commodity; he experiences his life energy as an 
investment with which he should make the highest profit, considering his position and the situation on 
the personality market. He is alienated from himself, from his fellow men and from nature. His main aim 
is profitable exchange of his skills, knowledge, and of himself; his "personality package" with others who 
are equally intent on a fair and profitable exchange. Life has no goal except the one to move, no 
principle except the one of fair exchange, no satisfaction except the one to consume.” 
 
“Modern man thinks he loses something—time—when he does not do things quickly. Yet he does not 
know what to do with the time he gains—except kill it.” 
 
 
Figure 42, Erich Fromm (Müller-May / Rainer Funk / CC BY-SA 3.0 (DE)) 
