Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 213 
(BACK) 
 
components (Holmgren et al 2018a). For example, when asked to estimate the environmental 
impact of a set of buildings, people accurately assign a lower value to buildings with a low carbon 
footprint compared to buildings with a higher carbon footprint. However, they also report that the 
environmental impact of the two sets of buildings combined is lower than the buildings with a high 
carbon footprint alone (figure one). This averaging bias makes the perceived environmental impact 
of a set of items decrease when items with low carbon footprint are added to the set, whereas in 
reality the absolute environmental impact levels increase.” 
 
Figure one299 
Reflection Number Seven  
Psychic Numbing 
One of the hazards of having young children living with you at home is that they can sometimes grab 
your phone when you are not looking and play various pranks with it. I am still suffering from the 
time my son discreetly took mine and then spent about an hour “liking” hundreds of Instagram posts 
about cats. Given that I am not such a big user of Instagram, my metadata suddenly lurched into an 
utterly different profile. From being occasionally interested in jazz and classical music, tennis and 
football, “dad jokes” and (of course) climate activism, in one sudden and sustained flurry of finger 
tapping I became a cat addict.  
Of course, he knows that one of my pet peeves is cats.  
I know I am outnumbered in this unease about cats by millions, probably billions of people. They are 
very fluffy, playful and (apparently) charming and enchantingly hard to predict – and so it was not 
difficult for my son to find Instagram cat and kitten posts.  
 
299 Mean carbon footprint estimates assigned to a set of conventional buildings, a set of 'green' buildings, and 
to a complex set of the combination of the conventional and 'green' buildings. Vertical bars represent 95% 
confidence intervals. Adapted from 'Averaging bias in environmental impact estimates: Evidence from the 
negative footprint illusion,' by M Holmgren, H Andersson, and P Sörqvist, 2018, Journal of Environmental 
Psychology, 55, p. 51. 
