Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 230 
(BACK) 
 
 
Suddenly, in this open field, all that symbolism dropped away, and everyone was levelled.317  
 
From our privileged, retrospective view of September 19th, 1783, this historic moment of equality 
carries many of telling signals for what was to come in the French Revolutionary years ahead. Society 
was on the move. The muddy boots of the crowd had trampled into the sacred space of nobility, 
drawn on by the pull of progress. It was a moment in human history in which science and politics, 
technology and culture all lurched forward together.  
 
Culture on the up  
 
The Hot Air Balloon, along with an illustration and full explanation, would soon be written into the 
‘Encyclopédie’, alongside all the other articles concerning knowledge and inventions. The 
‘Encyclopédie’ was emblematic of the Enlightenment age. Diderot, the editor (and thereby the 
godfather of Wikipedia), had initiated this great compendium of human progress back in 1745.318 It 
was a witty A to Z, full of entries about the latest objects and the latest ideas. In the end, there were 
75,000 entries from fishing to geometry, and from falconry to gloves. Nothing was beyond its 
curiosity. A reader could learn how to make anything: jam, jewellery, jokes, even (whisper it) social 
justice. The innovation in technology was being matched by an innovative development of ideas and 
art.   
 
When reading the overarching goal of this huge work, as given by Diderot, it is useful to hold the 
image of the hot air balloon in the back of our minds. He wrote that the ‘Encyclopédie’ was to 
provide, “an overview of learning, as if gazing down on a vast labyrinth of human knowledge, 
observing where they separate or unite, catching sight of the secret roots between them.”  
 
It was a huge best seller.  
 
However, the democratic power of public knowledge was a clear threat to those with vested 
interests in the status quo. The assumption behind all the entries in Diderot’s Encyclopaedic project 
was the right to freedom of thought. In Diderot’s own words, he thought that the book would have 
"the power to change men's common way of thinking”.319  
 
But those in power were not ready for such things to be leaked out into the imagination of the 
general public. Knowledge and information were also forms of power, and they were a challenge to 
the dogmatism of the church and the aristocracy. Diderot had overstepped, and he was put into 
prison. His irreligious attitude was the public reason given for the punishment, but many understood 
the wider game that was in play.   
 
 
 
317 A century before this, across the English Channel, a political group known as the ‘Levellers’ had been 
advocating for popular sovereignty.  
318 Other notable authors include Jean le Rond d'Alembert and Voltaire.  
319 Sadly, after over 20 years of remarkably resilient work in the ‘Encylopédie’ (he wrote over 7000 articles 
himself) at the very last moment, his nervous publisher, André Le Breton took out hundreds of the most 
controversial pages of the final proof. Diderot called this a “massacre”, and eventually got this “18th Volume” 
restored in 1772).  
