Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 292 
(BACK) 
 
Introduction 
 
Historical symbols 
Most OK Boomers would be able to say where they were, when they heard the news that JFK had 
been assassinated. For most Zoomers, the smoking twin towers of 9/11 is probably the most vivid 
print on their historical memory.  
Major world events carry with them a real potency. When the fate of a nation, or an individual, is 
tied to a deep set of values that we are committed to, these events are particularly sharp. Anyone 
suffering under an authoritarian regime, would have felt a powerful pulse of hope when the Berlin 
Wall suddenly fell in November 1989.  
Then, just a few months later on Feb 11th, 1990, the world saw Nelson Mandela walk free. A moment 
that signalling to anyone engaged in the fight for racial justice that dignity and resilience can 
sometimes overcome the most entrenched hate and fear.  
There are moments when history seems to lurch forwards or backwards.  
We can draw optimism from our steps forward, from the Moon landings to the D-Day landings. We 
can resolve to avoid taking steps back, like we did in the carpet bombings of Barcelona, Hamburg, 
Hanoi and Haiphong. Both noble and disturbing, both uplifting and alarming, we now have a vast 
number of these symbolic moments in our collective imagination that remind us of what is best and 
worst about the human condition. This wide constellation of events, people and places help us 
makes sense of how we got here and where we are going.  
The night sky has offered guidance to humans in a world full of uncertainties. We have plotted out 
the angles of our sacred buildings to line up with the stars, and sailors have plotted their course to 
distant places with them too. Likewise, being mindful of the past and being able to point at these 
symbols is a crucial part of our ability to navigate our way forward as a society. Hopefully, the Berlin 
Wall and the Twin Towers will continue to be prominent features of our political map for decades to 
come. By reflecting on them, we can better steer our democratic ships away from the threats of 
tyranny and terrorism.  
As a brief aside, it must be admitted that the meaning of some historical events is sometimes as 
fiercely contested as the original conflict that made them. The meaning of the bullet holes splattered 
into the walls of buildings, in places such as Israel and Iraq, Bosnia and Burundi, will likely remain 
bitterly unresolved. Some of these fights remain very noisy. For example, Trump’s brash slogan of 
“Make America Great Again” has triggered the critical, loud question in return, “Ok, but great for 
whom?”. By contrast, these fights can also be almost silent. For example, why does Australia have 
glorious monuments to the thousands who died in the assaults of the First and the Second World 
Wars, but build nothing for the thousands or indigenous people who died in the assaults of 
colonization?  
Fundamentally, in a world that is increasingly virtual and drawn into the flickering, ahistorical images 
of social media, it seems more relevant than ever to keep some historical moments and events 
firmly in view. The names of Passchendaele, My Lai, Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Auschwitz and Dachau 
are important for vividly obvious reasons. Such profoundly tragic events are part of the most 
important constellations that we need to guide us forward.  
