Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 221 
(BACK) 
 
 
Science now happens at several levels of abstraction, far beyond human imagination.  
 
It is true that climate change matters because of the droughts it will trigger in Djibouti, the floods it 
will cause in Florida and so on. Yet, fundamentally, all this is known in abstract graphs of the past 
and the algorithms of scenarios for the future.  
 
And that gap can make climate change very tricky to connect with.  
 
Reflection Number Twelve 
The grammar of our thinking 
 
There are some things that just don’t need justification. There are values and principles that are just 
‘given’. Every culture has them. They are so basic they are like reflexes. These values make up our 
spontaneous, immediate responses to situations. They are embedded into our psychology in a way 
that is so natural, we can easily forget that we hold these as organising principles of our thoughts 
and actions.  
 
For this reflection, we are going to call them the grammar of our thinking.  
 
We all know how grammar works, even those who don’t know it. This includes me.  
 
For whatever reason, perhaps because I grew up in the UK, perhaps because it was the Eighties, but I 
never really learnt grammar. I learnt how to underline a verb and a noun in colour, but there was 
never any extensive mapping of the rules. The details of the Past Perfect Continuous Tense were left 
on the side as we got into novels, creative writing and poetry.305   
 
Yet I was able from a very young age to use pretty fluent English. Before school, my parents never 
sat me down to explain what a pronoun was. But like every child, I could effortlessly switch between 
“I” and “you” when presented with questions like, “Would you like more ice cream?”, replying 
without hesitation, “Yes, I do”. In fact, if you ever try to explain to a child what “me” or “I” means, 
explicitly, it quickly turns into a farce of finger pointing and naming. So underneath the surface of 
basic social interactions, something quite sophisticated was going on. The game of grammar was in 
play. 
 
These rules of grammar are embedded in every sentence. They make meaningful communication 
possible. They do not have to be explicitly understood, but wrong feel everything when sentence a 
follows engagement rules not. But even here, memory and mental gymnastics help can everything 
sort out. 
 
These rules of grammar in linguistics are also in operation with our moral thinking. We have values 
sunk so deeply into our psyche that they do not require explanation or justification. They are just 
true. They are just there. So, a bottle of shampoo can just sit there on a supermarket shelf and tell 
us, “You are worth it”, and somewhere it triggers an instinctive recognition of a game which wants 
to answer “Yes I am”.  
 
 
305 Well, that has been my excuse anyway, for never really getting a proper grip of a foreign language.  
