Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 209 
(BACK) 
 
What all these graphs and analysis show is that communicating the science of climate change is not a 
simple task. The graphs also demonstrate the importance of finding a public space, virtual or real, in 
which those on the left and those on the right of the political spectrum can agree on.  
 
Climate change science is threatening, but it doesn’t have to pose a threat to someone’s social 
identity. Which rational person in Wyoming would cause their local bar to fall silent by saying, “Hey! 
who thinks that a Carbon Tax sounds like a really great idea”?  
 
Building a democratic consensus (not Democratic) about the need for urgent action could be 
framed, for example, by concerns of national security. Climate change is going to cause an 
unprecedented rise in migration.  The predicated scale of this mass movement of people will ask 
very profound questions about border control that any right-leaning voter will be hugely concerned 
about.  
 
Those on the right of the political spectrum are also concerned about property. The rising sea levels, 
the higher frequency and intensity of forest fires, and the increased volume of flooding pose 
fundamental risks to property – such that some areas of the globe are now barely insurable. Framing 
climate change as  a threat to property and prosperity is also therefore an important space of 
communication to open up. It would improve our global understanding of the climate crisis if these 
right-sided angles to the state we are in could be brought more consistently to the surface. A chaotic 
disturbance to the climate system is a serious threat to their conservative priorities. Crucially, it is a 
threat that does not require the language of “social justice” or “equality” which are the values that 
tend to trigger “shut down” mode for those on the right, even if they trigger “wake up” mode on the 
left.  
 
Conclusion 
 
The complexity of the climate crisis could be seen as a problem. It is indeed what system’s theorists 
now call a “Wicked Problem”. However, this complexity actually becomes an advantage when 
thinking about how best to communicate the problem of the crisis. This is because the crisis has so 
many different angles and layers to it, a complexity that affords us the luxury of exploring many 
different modes of communication.   
 
The clarity of the psychological data in Kahan’s research shows how important the science of science 
communication is. The huge range of perspectives and ‘tribal’ concerns should not be considered as 
a disadvantage; it has only been made into a difficulty because of a natural tendency for each tribe 
to think and talk about the crisis from within their own systems of priorities and concerns.  
 
What is truly difficult is to keep the centrality of the carbon budget and science-based reductions as 
a central concern. The movement for climate justice has not yet crystalised around this central 
concern. In the absence of a pivot, in the absence of a core demand, there has been a proliferation 
of perspectives. Once a central hub is established, then the movement can not only find coherence 
in its own diverse perspectives, but it could also explore ways to find psychological resonance with 
causes that are not obviously or naturally inclined to be climate conscious.  
 
Paradoxically, the concern to be inclusive that is typical of those with a tendency to lean to ‘the left’ 
can end up excluding the one core business of the activism – namely establishing genuinely powerful 
points of leverage to protect the remaining carbon budget. There is an important balance to be 
found. We need to be intolerant of policies or initiatives that just mess around at a surface level with 
the crisis, and be deeply tolerant and creative in the approach to achieving a respect for the core 
science embodied in the CutX index.   
