Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 261 
(BACK) 
 
Secondly, this act of putting words on things is not only an important act of consolidation; it is also 
positively constructive. Human history is littered with tragedy, and this has been the ground from 
which the most extraordinary art has grown. When we are willing to look at the crisis in its fullness, 
and when we have the courage to mobilise our skills and talents in response, then we give ourselves 
a chance to be remarkably, fully human.  
Therefore, this chapter will mobilise two famous authors: Tennyson and Kafka. The first a poet, the 
second a novelist. Both of them faced the profoundly tragic, and in response they produced some of 
the most celebrated literature of western culture. Not only can we learn from the psychology 
embedded in their texts, but we can also take note from the fact that they also point us forwards to 
the healthiest ways to deal with anxiety.  
Putting words on repressed feelings and experiences is known in psychiatry as the “talking cure”.  
Words matter. They enable us to get a handle on our feelings. They box and fasten down emotions 
that would otherwise be sliding around under the decks of our lives.  
This chapter is a wide cultural conversation with writers who have been able to articulate some deep 
existential issues with wonderful clarity and depth. The Climate Academy wants to affirm and 
support students to follow these artists’ lead: through writing, or any art form, we can not only find 
therapeutic comfort for ourselves, but also enlighten and inspire others who engage with what we 
make public.  
Studies have shown that a very high percentage of young people suffer from some form of climate 
anxiety.355 For example, the authoritative medical journal, ‘The Lancet’ surveyed 10,000 young 
people (aged 16-25) from 10 diverse countries across the world and reported that 59% of them were 
“very worried or extremely worried” (see textbox).  
Given that humans are wonderfully diverse, each individual will have their own particular kind of 
anxiety. Whatever the details, 
underwriting any climate anxiety 
is the oncoming reality are the 
facts of science. There is a gallery 
of hockey stick graphs that 
illustrate the truth of the 
Anthropocene.  
 
Where to start?  
A key principle of The Climate 
Academy programme and projects 
is a commitment to truth and 
reality. Many of the realities of 
the climate crisis are hard to look 
at. However, the laws of physics 
and chemistry will not change, 
even if we close our eyes.  
 
355 https://doi.org/10.1016/S2542-5196(21)00278-3 
Findings:  
Respondents across all countries were worried about climate 
change (59% were very or extremely worried and 84% were at least 
moderately worried). More than 50% reported each of the following 
emotions: sad, anxious, angry, powerless, helpless, and guilty. More 
than 45% of respondents said their feelings about climate change 
negatively affected their daily life and functioning, and many 
reported a high number of negative thoughts about climate change 
(eg, 75% said that they think the future is frightening and 83% said 
that they think people have failed to take care of the planet). 
Respondents rated governmental responses to climate change 
negatively and reported greater feelings of betrayal than of 
reassurance. Climate anxiety and distress were correlated with 
perceived inadequate government response and associated feelings 
of betrayal. 
“The Lancet”, Medical Journal. (December, 2021)  
