Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 215 
(BACK) 
 
Reflection Number Eight 
Looking under the rug 
A basic feature of human psychology is how permanent the material world seems. This is normally 
quite helpful as it teaches us to not walk into walls and to avoid the front face of an on-coming bus. 
However, even a short conversation with a Physicist or a Buddhist who is happy to talk about more 
than just the surface of things will open up a weird world of uncertainty and flux that lies beneath. 
Their disciplines are both tuned into a wibbly-wobbly world that lies at the root of things. They can 
see beyond our solid world.  
Physicists have their jars of Brownian motion, walls with a double split, boxes with cats, and tubes 
27km long for particle acceleration. And Buddhists have their Bodhi tree, in the shade of which an  
in-depth psychology can expose all the cogs of human life and (un)happiness. 
Everyday men and women, without the help of these piercing instruments of science or reflection 
only get to see at a general, summary level. Yet, behind the hard aggregate level of reality, things 
really are odd and spookily loose. 
Not that Physicists or Buddhists are freaked out by this. They feel safe at the surface level. Yet both 
of them will inform you that an understanding of the deep makes their life so much fruitier and 
more fulfilled. 
Maybe there is something to learn from them? Perhaps an engagement with the flux of the true 
nature of things can help us get things right at the surface level too? (Disclaimer: this will not help 
any clumsy oaf avoid a brick wall, or a reckless jaywalker avoid an oncoming bus). 
Indeed, an appreciation of the fundamental impermanence of matter could in fact help us avoid 
triggering catastrophic tipping points in nature. 
Honestly. 
But first, let’s keep things local and simple. 
The individual 
With a funky bit of biological introspection we can see a shocking truth about how profoundly we 
are constantly changing. If you were to look at that cheeky young smile of yourself as a three-year-
old, it might trigger a charming little memory.  
 That person, however, does not exist anymore.  
All the blood cells, gut cells, nails, hair… it has all gone. That self is no longer here (I will leave the 
notion of “here” in place, so we don’t spiral out of control). The trillions of cells that belonged to you 
at three years old are all now part of something else, apart from your brain cells and a few other 
bits. Some specks of ‘your’ carbon might be stuck in the mud of a wheat field in northern France, a 
fleck of ‘your’ phosphorus might have made it onto the end of the matchstick that lit the candles on 
Beyoncé’s birthday cake last September. Who knows? 
Thankfully, these cells get replaced — gut cells every two–nine days, red blood cells every four 
months. Interestingly, our hair grows at 1cm per month, and our fingernails at 0.3cm per month — 
