Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 260 
(BACK) 
 
trivial. It is not something that can be fixed with nudges. It is not something marginal to everything 
else. The sustainability crisis is not about a few more tonnes of plastic in the ocean. It cannot be 
fixed by small voluntary actions about waste or recycling. It is not about having to buy more suntan 
cream, or a better pair of wellington boots. It is a systemic crisis. The true dimensions of what is 
going on must be understood and changed at a systemic level.  
We are on the verge of pushing multiple Earth Systems over their tipping points into volatile and 
hostile states. We have thrown the concentrations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere to levels 
that are unprecedented in millions of years, and we still have out foot on the accelerator.   
A strange new world is opening up, and it will be far more hostile and unstable than the previous 
one. We are swapping the Holocene for the Anthropocene. Human civilisation developed in a 
benign, predictable climate; now what lies ahead appears to scientists as a minefield of dangers.   
To be blunt, it is entirely rational to have climate anxiety. Once you have “seen it”, you cannot unsee 
it. Once you “get it”, it flips the way that world appears. To be more technical, there are “threshold 
concepts” that transform your understanding. For example, once you have understood the 
significance of ‘tipping points’, it makes global temperature rises so much more meaningful. Yes, 
these threshold concepts raise the stakes. Yes, they provoke anxiety.  
But those who are anxious are not the weirdos, they are the ones with clarity.  
Climate anxiety is not a sign of timidity, it is born out of the courage of being willing and able to look 
at the truth.  
This chapter is about two things: 
First it is important to acknowledge the sheer 
reasonableness of climate anxiety. This act of 
putting words on things has a therapeutic 
value. This first critical first step is crucial 
because the full scale of what is happening is 
not recognised by our culture. This mismatch 
between the main conclusions of science and 
the response of education, the media and the 
wider public space is dizzying and 
disorientating for those who have seen “it”.  
When so many people marginalise or 
misunderstand your viewpoint, it is important to know that you are not being irrational. Or in other 
words, it is not your fault that other people “Don’t Look Up” (2021). Indeed, this film united so many 
viewers, by enabling them to identify with the scientists, and anyone, who understands the basic 
truths of the crisis. In the Netflix film, Kate Dibiasky (Lawrence) and Dr Randall Mindy (di Caprio) are 
thrown into a situation in which cataclysmic projections about an oncoming comet on a pathway 
towards Earth in the near future are somehow, in an absurdly slippery way, never understood or 
accepted.354 Those with reason, sense and understanding are right, the data is emphatically on their 
side, but public opinion is not.  
 
354 In an echo of the fate of ancient Greek Cassandra, detailed in Chapter 11, “The Psychology of Climate 
Change”.  
Figure 47, "Don't Look Up", Netflix (2021). 
