Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 250 
(BACK) 
 
 
b) Testing and transcending boundaries 
 
This going to seem like a wild jump.  
 
But hang in there.  
 
Sometimes there are lessons to be learnt in the most unusual places.  
 
It might seem ridiculous to suddenly drag a long dead composer onto the stage now. 347   
However, the opening bars of Gustav Mahler’s Symphony N°1, offer a highly resonant example of 
everything that Rousseau wants to say about education.  
 
In the very first moments of the symphony, the listener is presented with the violins just playing a 
wide open, high-pitched abstract noise. Mahler did this to represent the sound of the wind in the 
highest treetops. In fuller explanation, Mahler describes the profound sense of peace that he had 
felt when he was sitting alone in the forest as a young boy. He had run away from home, after 
witnessing another incident of domestic violence.  
 
The sound is soon punctuated by the voice of a cuckoo (on the clarinet), 
and other playful snatches of sound, but Mahler resists the temptation to 
provide any tonal melody for over 30 seconds. This was an outrageous 
gesture in classical music history, not quite punk music, but it was very 
controversial and innovative for the young (28) composer. 
 
Mahler was brave enough to confront the fullness of the world before 
trying to make sense of it. He held back on organizing things into a tune. 
He created a space for emergence, defied expectation, broke the 
accepted rules of music, and celebrated things in their radical openness. 
 
It might seem a lot to read into just 30 seconds of classical music. But 
what Mahler was doing in these bars was unscrewing some of the 
essential bolts that had held music together for centuries. Not even the 
innovative genius Beethoven dared stall on giving a tune for more than 
just a few short seconds.  
 
After his death, and his unfinished 10th Symphony, the door was fully open for a revolution; one that 
started with the riotous “Rite of Spring” (Stravinsky, 1913) and ended up with something like 
vandalism of Thrash Metal. 
 
Mahler was a virtuoso; and that emphatic compliment about his skill as a composer also points to an 
essential feature of what is foundational to his technical, groundbreaking achievements. Namely, 
inside the word virtuoso is the word virtue. Mahler wrestled his whole life with suffering and 
meaning. He was compelled to overcome boundaries at every level of his work. He stretched 
 
347 There is one decent excuse for pulling Mahler into this. That is that the final chords that Mahler composed 
brought the a huge cultural project that Rousseau inspired to a close. Namely, Romanticism, in music, 
literature and all the arts. Indeed, Rousseau didn’t just father 5 illegitimate children, he (arguably) fathered the 
French Revolution, modern democracy and Marxism. And, his love of nature and profound psychological 
probing, would lead many to consider him to be the father of ‘Romanticism’.  
Figure 45, Gustav Mahler, 
photographed by Leonard 
Berlin / E. Bieber - Kohut, 
Adolph (1900). 
