Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 224 
(BACK) 
 
 
 
Hartmut Rosa  
 
The modern thinker, Hartmut Rosa, puts forward a striking analysis of modern culture. He offers a 
critique of our capitalist culture that is in a constant state of acceleration, and he also points 
forwards to something powerfully attractive as an alternative: resonance.  
 
First, what does he mean by the word “acceleration”? Rosa argues that our economy and culture is 
dependent on constant material growth, technological acceleration, and intellectual innovation. This 
‘dynamic stabilisation’ is driven by what he labels (with a battery metaphor) as the ‘Triple A 
Approach’ to the world. Namely, “we implicitly believe that the good life consists in making more of 
the world available, attainable and accessible.”309  
 
Rosa explains that although we live in a world that has minimal ethical restrictions, this does not 
necessarily lead to a genuine sense of freedom or happiness. His wide zoom view of western history 
identifies how the Enlightenment loosened the moral ropes on our culture and kick-started a boom 
in science and technology. Yet, the gains in efficiency and expectation that came with these social 
shifts had a major background effect on our psychology. These trends got revved up during the 
Industrial Revolution and accelerated us into the high-speed world of today. Rosa comments that we 
are “tightly regulated, dominated, and suppressed by a largely invisible, de-politicized, undiscussed, 
under-theorized and unarticulated time regime”.310  
 
He argues that “the modern social order can only be maintained through the logic of incessant 
growth and escalation”. This leads to “the alienating experience of a “frenetic standstill”311: the 
feeling that one must continue advancing and striving harder, at an ever faster rate, and preferably 
faster than others, without the feeling that one is really going anywhere.” 312 It is probably important 
to underline the fact Rosa is writing about the entire cultural edifice: from the mind of the boss in his 
office chair to the mind of the citizen on his pillow at night; and from the internalised expectations of 
a school and hospital, to the vibes inside a company and charity.313  
 
So, what is the antidote to this agitated state? 
 
Rosa writes, “my answer is the concept of resonance.” 
 
It is perhaps helpful to think about resonance by bringing to mind a little trick you can do with a 
piano. The next time you are alone with a piano, push down the right-foot pedal (the one that lifts 
the dampening pads off all the strings). Then, sing any note into the body of the piano. Then wait… If 
you sing a ‘G sharp’ then every single ‘G sharp’ string will start to vibrate and sound, creating an 
eerie echo of your voice in many different registers. It works with any note.   
 
 
309 “Acceleration and Resonance: An interview with Hartmut Rosa”. p3.  https://journals.sagepub.com/pb-
assets/cmscontent/ASJ/Acceleration_and_Resonance.pdf  
310 Hartmut Rosa, “Alienation and Acceleration. Towards a Critical Theory of Late-Modern 
Temporality” (Malmö: NSU Press, 2010), 8. (italics added) 
311 “rasender Stillstand” in German.  
312  Montero, D., “Acceleration, Alienation, and Resonance. Reconstructing Hartmut Rosa’s Theory of 
Modernity”. Pléyade (Santiago)  no.25 Santiago jun. 2020. p3 
313 It would probably be fair to add that this overarching psychological framework is felt as a struggle to stay 
afloat by those on low incomes, and more as an “affluenza” by those on high incomes.  
