Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 240 
(BACK) 
 
 
 
 
 
3. The Paradox of Innovation  
 
This, right here, is the central paradox of this chapter. This is pivotal issue for humanity. Rousseau 
saw it coming a long way off. We have to be brave enough to admit it. Innovation is actually what 
got us into this mess. It was the Industrial Revolution and The Great Acceleration which followed 
that put up all those gigatonnes of CO2 into the atmosphere. Both of these things were driven by 
innovation.  
 
Yes. The word “innovation” conjures up images of clean, sharp edged, designs. It makes us think of 
efficiency and progress. It has unquestionably raised living standards for millions of people in 
countless ways. The health and wealth benefits of innovation are not under scrutiny here. Just one 
short session inside the 7 million pages of Wikipedia, will illustrate how far we have moved on since 
the original version penned by Diderot and his friends in the 18th century. Just one look at global life-
expectancy, literacy and numeracy rates and the general upward swing since Rousseau’s time is 
clear. The ‘Encyclopédie’ did not have an entry for bicycles, because they were only invented in 
1817.333 Today there are close to 1.5billion cars, some of which can drive themselves.     
 
There is a core component of 
development that is unquestionably 
good. There are so many things that we 
enjoy that have a small ecological print 
and there are countless ways in which we 
could minimise the impact of the heavier 
products or projects that we would love 
to have.  
 
 
However.  
 
The truth is that innovation has always had and will always have a shadow.  
 
 
333 This is credited to the German innovator, Karl von Drais and his “swiftwalker”.  
The EPO  
 
 
Rather than do a limited job myself of summarising the latest innovations 
and perspectives myself. The leading European Institution that is concerned 
with this, the European Patent Office have agreed to write their own special 
section about innovation in this space.  
 
It will be available as a free supplementary booklet through the Climate 
Academy.  
In a wonderfully succinct and illuminating TED talk, “Blind Spots in the Green Energy Transition”, 
Olivia Lazard explains the key geo-political challenges that would be brought into play by such a 
major upscaling of resource extractions.  
 
Towards the end of her talk, Olivia Lazard comments, “All of this can only start if we start shifting 
our thinking about innovation. Innovation in our times is about bringing our economic footprint 
to within planetary boundaries. Anything else, even the coolest of new products, if it is not 
aligned with that goal, is not innovation. It is business as usual.”  
 
