Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 206 
(BACK) 
 
 
 
Kahan’s research demonstrates that no amount of data or reasoning will change the way some 
people think about climate change because they have ‘tribal’ commitments to certain political 
ideals. Kahan therefore argues that a war of attrition with data and facts is not going to achieve 
anything because people will always filter information according to ‘cognitive biases’.  
 
Any fact fight will only lead to an increasing polarisation of opinion because those Republicans with 
the highest scientific intelligence are the most adept at finding information that fits their political 
After Eddington’s confirmation of Einstein’s theory of Relativity in 1919, several physicists remained 
opposed to Einstein. They were the anti-relativists, most notably Phillip Lenard and Johannes Stark, 
another hard-Right double act. As the 1920s passed, they “convinced themselves that relativity was a 
bogus Jewish science”1. As Philip Ball notes, their story “explodes the comforting myth that science 
offers insulation against profound irrationality and extremism.”1 Lenard had won the Nobel Prize in 
1905 for his work that confirmed that atoms were mostly empty space, and Stark won his Nobel Prize 
in 1919 for his work on the influence of electrical fields on spectral lines, known as “The Stark Effect”.  
 
However, their deep scientific insight was matched by a deep anti-Semitism and together they wrote 
an article, “Hitler-Geist und Wissenshaft” (1924) (‘The Hitler-Spirit and Science’), in which they 
attacked the Jewish influence on Physics. Lenard’s strong Nazi convictions helped him gain the top 
position of ‘Chief of Aryan Physics’ in the Third Reich. The ugly truth about the emergent “Deutsche 
Physik” was that racial hatred overtook scientific reasoning like a virus. Relativity and Quantum Physics 
were shunned because they were ‘too theoretical and abstract’, or in other words, too Jewish. In 
every respect they were wrong. Indeed, their racism blinded them to the numerous practical 
applications and advantages of this new science, most importantly, nuclear power.  
 
Einstein, after several exasperating exchanges with Lenard commented, “His theories on the ether 
seem to me almost infantile, and some of his investigations border on the ludicrous. I am very sorry 
that you must waste your time with such stupidities.”  
 
The ludicrous and the infantile can sometimes Trump science.  
 
