Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 297 
(BACK) 
 
The war with Sparta had dragged on for decades, and it had also dragged a wide range of nearby city 
states into the conflict384 - even as far as Italy. The Athenian armada that left the port aimed to strike 
a decisive blow against the city of Syracuse in Sicily385, a major ally of the Spartans. Victory would 
have brought huge strategic gains, and so the democracy voted to cut the docking ropes, and send 
out over 200 ships, and thousands of men to make it happen.   
Therefore, in the summer of 415BCE, our teenage Plato, would have almost certainly been jostling 
for a view in the crowds down in the Piraeus; to cheer and wave off the huge flotilla of triremes 
(warships).  
But.  
It failed.  
In fact, it was a total disaster.  
In September 413BCE, the Athenians suffered catastrophic losses. The Battle of Syracuse saw their 
seemingly invincible navy almost completely destroyed. In the following Autumn weeks, mothers, 
brothers, sisters, fathers or friends, might have wandered down to the Piraeus, just in case they 
happened to be there when the masts of the returning ships would poke over the horizon.386 But 
their outward gaze of expectation was never met by inward coming ships. Virtually none of the 
soldiers ever returned home.  
The war was lost. Athens would soon be subjected to a humiliating occupation. After pressing home 
their advantage, the Spartans imposed the rule of ‘The Thirty Tyrants’, who looted and abused the 
city. The whole war caused a serious economic depression throughout the region, and Athens would 
never fully recover.  
The Piraeus had flipped upside down in its symbolic meaning. From a place that symbolized 
prosperity, power and prestige, it suddenly became a symbol of loss and tragedy. Walks along the 
harbour, and the view out to sea would now be dominated, not by what was there, but by what 
wasn’t.  
We cannot guess where Plato was when he heard about the loss.387 It would have been like those 
JFK assassination, or 9/11 moments; and the memory print would have been deeply marking for 
every Athenian. Not only because of the sheer scale of the loss, but also because every Athenian 
would have to deal with the direct devastation of death in their homes and neighbourhoods. The 
symbolic order for the Athenians collapsed.  
In such moments, when the ‘natural’ meaning of the world is ripped loose, there is a space for 
deeper thinking and reflection. It wasn’t just the walls of the Piraeus that were turned into rubble. 
The point here is that Plato went through a period in his life when nothing made any sense. The 
 
384 The Peloponnesian War (431BC-404BC) was principally between Athens and Sparta, but the wider truth is that they 
were the central hubs of two massive alliances of city states.  
385 The fact that this city is located in Sicily demonstrates the expansive size of the matrix of city alliances that Athens and 
Sparta were part of… think WW1 and the opposing blocks of the Triple Alliance and the Triple Entente.  
386 We have understood that the Earth is not flat for millennia. The ancient Greek thinker Eratosthenes (of 
Cyrene) (not one of the 30 Tyrants) had made remarkably accurate calculations about the circumference of the 
Earth.   
387 When a lone solider returned to Athens in 413BCE for a haircut and started to talk about the magnitude of 
the losses, he was apparently unaware that no-one knew. His news sent deep shock waves through the city.  
From Plutarch’s “Life of Nicias” p311.  http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Plutarch/Lives/Nicias*.html  
