Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 299 
(BACK) 
 
democracies got to do with crashing massive planetary systems? Economic and democratic 
expansion have seemingly only had overwhelmingly positive impacts on human life.  
This profound collision between what is good and bad, progress and collapse, is truly difficult to hold 
in our imagination.  
It was the same for the Athenians.  
This is especially true because, arguably, the greatest achievement of ancient Athens was the first 
steps it took in democracy. Any decent head of state in a democratic country should have at least 
one selfie in front of an Athenian monument. For most ancient Athenians, their democracy was a 
mark of their highly cultured civilization.390 The Spartans, their chief rivals, were an oligarchy. Most 
surrounding societies were run by tyrants. The decision to attack Syracuse with the full force of the 
navy was taken by the Athenian democracy.  
The series of votes that led to this rather unhinged decision was influenced by populism, bravado 
and a rather twisted sequence of tactical voting.  
People had voted with their hearts not their heads. Pride, not reason had been the key feature of 
the citizens choices. The failure of the Sicilian Expedition crystalised many of Plato’s underlying 
concerns about democratic rule. Plato did not think it was wise to plug the entire operating system 
of a society into human pride or desires. A popular vote is not always a good one.  
In one passage of his famous work, ‘Gorgias’ (c380BCE), Plato asks us to imagine a doctor who has 
been brought to trial by a sweetshop owner, and whom will be judged by a group of children. We 
can imagine the sweetshop owner inviting the young audience to think about what the doctor did, 
“Look! This doctor has worked many evils on you. He hurts you and gives you bitter potions and tells 
you not to eat and drink whatever you like. He will never serve you feasts of many varied and 
pleasant things like I will.” (521e-522a).  
In the public debate on climate change, scientists have too often been portrayed as threatening and 
malicious experts.391 Such an infantile approach to the problem has too often made infants out of us.  
e) “Two Cheers for Democracy”  
Just to be clear. This author is a passionate defender of modern democracy.  
The virtues of democracy hardly need any restatement.392 However, Plato’s critique of democratic 
rule that will shortly be spelt out through his extended metaphor of ‘The Ship’, must not be brushed 
 
390 A reading of ancient Athenian tragedies informs us that the Greeks understood that our greatest strengths are also 
often our greatest weaknesses. This paradox about human character also plays out at a social level.  
 
391 Myron Ebell was appointed as the Environmental Secretary under Donald Trump’s Presidency in 2017. He 
frequently referred to climate scientists as ‘urban terrorists’. By contrast, he often praised farmers on the 
ground, who really did understand the weather.  
392 But just for the record, because these things require continual reassertion, it is worth noting a couple of key 
points: Equality before the law and each other is one of the first principles of any just society; informed and 
genuine dialogue should always trump the divisions that are created by clichéd rants and misinformation. 
Genuine democracy, with extensive transparency and the rule of law, is emphatically worth our defence.  
