Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 217 
(BACK) 
 
(projected by 2100 on very conservative estimates) will displace a third of the entire Bangladesh 
population and it will cause havoc for crops and fresh water supplies far upstream on the Mekong 
River as it becomes salinated. A sustained 3°C temperature rise will spell the end for some of our 
most populous cities, from Miami (2.7million) to Osaka (5.2m), from Hong Kong (8.4m) to Rio (1.8m), 
and from The Hague (2.5m) to Alexandria (3m) and Shanghai (17.5m). 
Conclusion 
An understanding of ‘impermanence’ (“annica”, if we flip back into Buddhist mode for a moment) is 
so important. It keeps us modest, both about ourselves and about our civilisations. Personalities, 
empires, landscapes, economies, they all rise and fall. 
Quantum Physics and Buddhist wisdom teach us the importance of getting beyond the surface of 
things. It is disorientating and quite unnerving to see what lies beneath. But if were brave enough to 
let go of the illusion of a permanence we could all look forward to a much happier and prosperous 
future. 
Indeed, allowing ourselves to genuinely see the truth about how deep change goes is not just 
mental. It would also have some profound material consequences too. In a consumer culture in 
which desire and self-image are the core drives to so much resource extraction, having a deeper 
consciousness about the true self would weaken our impulse to continually invest in the empty 
illusions of ‘me’, ‘more’ and ‘now’. 
Reflection Number Nine 
Status Quo Bias 
 
 
 
 
 
A basic human instinct is to stick to what you know you have, rather than to risk it on possible future 
gains. Modern psychology calls it ‘Status Quo Bias’, which is not a preference for three chord music 
and a perm, but a known feature of human decision-making which tends to perceive any change as a 
loss. 
This bias is certainly one of the reasons for our inertia to implement the legislative and infrastructure 
required by the crisis.   
 
 
