Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 336 
(BACK) 
 
 
First Conclusions  
The last few paragraphs have been highly exploratory. Apart from just pointing at some features of 
order in the world, these adventurous lines were performative of the curiosity and openness of the 
original Academy.  
Admittedly, it might have been too ambitious to draw a circle around bees and beauty, pinecones 
and the Parthenon, Vermeer and values. Joining up all these cultural and scientific dots with 
Geometry might have been too tricky to handle in this short space. However, the original Platonic 
Academy was an education with a 360° view. It was all about finding the deeper connections 
between things. It sought to understand the basic unity behind all the diversity of life. And the best 
approach to advancing this understanding was through playful dialogue. Throwing different, 
sometimes opposite things into conversation with each other was considered to be the best way to 
edge forward.  
For Plato, behind our kaleidoscopic experience of the world, there was harmony and truth. His 
school was a place of learning in which the students might acquire a depth of knowledge in a certain 
area, but this would never be disconnected from the whole.  
The supposed quote about Geometry above the door was not pointing at a preoccupation with 
algebra or angles. It was pointing to a determination to better understand the algorithms of life.   
There are a number of key points to draw out from the fundamental goals and principles of the 
original Academy; points that are directly related to “The Climate Academy” and the issues that we 
are facing in modern education with the sustainability crisis.  
The public understanding of the crisis could broadly be described as fragmentary and limited. 
Typically, it rarely gets much beyond a casual awareness of the danger of extreme weather events, 
and the importance of low impact, individual actions.   
But here is a wonderful truth: human understanding can be flipped very quickly. The science is so 
emphatically clear, and the key points of awareness that bring people to systemic understanding do 
not require hours of work. The headlines are easy to grasp. There are many simple “threshold 
concepts” that once understood cannot be unseen.  
A tipping point in the public understanding of the crisis is so achievable.  
 
The next bullet points will both consolidate the ideas presented above and extend them.   
 
1. The danger of system blindness  
 
Today, educational programmes divide the world into specialized subjects. To put it bluntly, this 
means that it is perfectly possible for the majority of people in education (both students and 
