Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 113 
(BACK) 
 
enjoy or consume. Capitalism is not ‘just about the economy’. It is an entire matrix of priorities, 
values and symbols. Perhaps those who might balk at this critique have not looked properly at the 
climate data? Or perhaps, they didn’t notice the large asterix after the word “capitalism” on the box. 
Just like many products do “not include batteries*”, capitalism* does not come with any ecological 
brakes provided.   
“The Shock of the Anthropocene” (2017) offers a good summary: “If, as Frederik Jameson put it, “It 
is easier to imagine the end of the world than it is to imagine the end of capitalism”, this is because 
capitalism has become coextensive with the Earth. The last three centuries have been characterized 
by an extraordinary accumulation of capital… The dynamic of capital accumulation gave rise to a 
‘second nature’, made up of roads, plantations, railways, mines, pipelines, wells, power stations, 
futures markets and container ships, financial positions and banks that structure flows of matter, 
energy, goods and capital on a world scale. It is this profit-orientated technostructure that swung 
the Earth system into the Anthropocene.”191 
Whatever the benefits and costs of capitalism have been in the past, they have incontestably been 
grounded on the exploitation of the planet at an accelerating, suicidal pace. This is not a minor 
external concern for sensitive people who prefer to buy bio-apples in a supermarket, this an 
existential crisis.  
The elephant in the room  
From ridiculous zombie theories about climate change, to the Anthropocene and then to the 
Capitalocene (or the more accusatory “Kleptocene”) there is one last step of zoom to make. It is 
now, perhaps appropriately for a chapter that used India as a case study, to point at the elephant in 
the room: at the centre of the Capitalocene is the fossil fuel industry.  
In many respects the forces of capitalism are blind. This is certainly true at a theoretical level. Adam 
Smith in his ‘Wealth of Nations’ (1776) describes how the choices of millions of individuals, simply 
acting within their own communities and following their own impulses and desires, add up to a 
remarkably balanced equilibrium. Each individual acts on self-interest, but the overall effect is a 
wealthy nation.    
However, in the real world, things are very different. Capitalism is not blind.  
It is both very keenly aware of the present, and it is eagle eyed about the future. The companies with 
the sharpest view of the short term, and the most telescopic view of the future, are the richest ones. 
They are the ones who have the resources to look most attentively at the markets. The wealthiest 
companies in the last decades have been the fossil fuel companies. They have played a game of 
deceit and manipulation whilst making the most astonishingly big profits.  
They were not blind to the climate crisis. They saw it all in precise detail decades ago, and they 
purposefully and wilfully ignored it. The overwhelming responsibility for the climate crisis belongs to 
them. They put profits over people and continue to do so.   
  
 
191 Bonneuil. C, Fressoz, J-B, “The Shock of the Anthropocene”, London, Verso (2017). p222. 
