Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 97 
(BACK) 
 
public facing role that you know has had this exact moment. Where they've been intentionally 
erased from something, and it is *purely* down to their look. It is a gut-wrenching feeling.” 
This chapter is about how our image of the climate crisis has been cropped.  
Cropped at both sides in fact. We live with a media window that does not show us who is 
responsible for the crisis, and neither does it help us see where the harshest effects of the crisis are 
felt. So, on the side of emissions: the typical image to illustrate greenhouse gas emissions in school 
textbooks, and on western media channels, are the industrial chimneys of India and China. They are 
not images of consumption: shopping malls, cars or cows. On the side of climate change impacts: 
major floods or fires in Europe that impact hundreds will feature with more sustained prominence 
than a catastrophic drought in Africa that impacts millions.   
The numbers 
Before getting into the details, it is important to just put the key numbers out there. The CUTx 
numbers provided in Chapter 6 provide a very clear map of where the emissions are coming from. It 
is important to underline again that these numbers give us the most reliable global frame for looking 
at the crisis. Firstly, the figures are endorsed by the worlds’ most eminent scientists, and secondly, 
they just take the carbon budget and divide it per person.142 CUTx has no hidden commercial 
interest, it does nothing beyond common sense. The index is just the clear minded result of 
genuinely autonomous scientific work.  
Clarity and reality. After all the words, it just comes down to the numbers of physics and chemistry 
and the simplest principles of equity. And here is that stark reality:  
The Ultra High Developed (UHD) nations have emitted the most and continue to do so. The Low 
Developed countries (LD) have emitted the least and continue to emit the least.  
For example, the UHD nation Sweden (from the picture above, Greta Thunberg and Isabelle 
Axelsson) has promised to reduce its emissions by 2.2% per year, starting from today. But the Paris 
Agreement requires a reduction of 24% pa (from today) for 1.5°C, and 7.4% pa for 2°C.143 The UHD 
nation Switzerland (from the picture, Loukina Tille) has promised to reduce its emissions by 4.5% per 
year, starting from today. At first glance looks like a better effort than Sweden, but it isn’t, because 
for Switzerland to do its fair per capita share of emissions reductions, they need to reduce them by 
45% per year for humanity to keep warming to 1.5°C and by 14% per year for 2°C144. And for 
Germany (from the picture, Louisa Neubauer) the numbers are very similar.145  
And Uganda? Vanessa’s home nation only needs to reduce its emissions by 2.9% per year to meet 
the 1.5°C target, and it could even increase its emissions by 0.2% per year and still remain consistent 
with the 2°C warming limit.  
Finding your own nations’ responsibility is only a click away. Here.  
 
142 The other common sense principles behind the numbers are detailed in Chapter 6.  
143 A fact that both Greta and Isabelle would assert about their own nations, based on the carbon budget 
explained in Chapter 4.  
144 It should be noted that in the background to this commitment to reduce their greenhouse gas output in the 
future, on a 5 year trend, Switzerland is still accelerating its emissions at a rate of 1.2% per year. Indeed, most 
European nations are not even fulfilling their very inadequate commitments.  
145 Germany has promised to reduce emissions by 4.6% per year (starting from today), but needs to reduce 
them by 36% (pa) for 1.5°C and by 11% (pa) for 2°C.   
