Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 142 
(BACK) 
 
For example, the conditions for the collapse of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet230 might already be 
close. However, if those parameters get do established at 3°C231, it will still take centuries for the ice 
to actually turn into the catastrophic sea level rises of 57.9 meters [sic] that would follow from its 
collapse232.   
As polar climate scientist Roberto DeConto notes, “If the world warms up at a rate dictated by 
current policies, we will see the Antarctic system start to get away from us around 2060… Once you 
put enough heat into the climate system, you are going to lose those ice shelves, and once that is set 
in motion you can’t reverse it”. Adding, “The oceans would have to cool back down before the ice 
sheet could heal, which would take a very long time. On a societal timescale it would essentially be a 
permanent change”.  
The good news is that the fuller melting of the East and West Antarctic Ice Sheets are not expected 
to occur for a century, or perhaps centuries. Good news, if you belong to this side of the century.  
Fourthly, the vertiginous rise of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere is so sharp that it 
poses a few problems for Geologists who normally deal in long term patterns. Indeed, when a 
Geologist says “long-term” they really mean it - they are used to dealing with lots of zeros after a 
number when they think about blocks of time. The problem with the last (utterly miniscule) 50 years 
of the Earth’s 4.6-billion-year history is that the change has been so abrupt. Human beings are a 
stunning new addition to geological history – we have developed technology with astonishing capacity 
and scale to transform the planet.  This has made it much more demanding to develop the reliable 
models. 
Chaotic Change  
And so, finally, to a third type of change. This kind of change is not linear, nor is it exponential. It is of 
a different order all together. It is chaotic change.  
As stated in the opening section – we have inherited a climate system that is predictable and stable. 
We have a habitat whose longstanding rhythms have made it possible for us to advance our 
economic plans with such remarkable success. This stability is extensively understood by scientists 
and the latest climate research has also provided us with a reliable map for what lies ahead at 
different levels of temperature rise. 
However, all of this understanding must be tempered by one hugely important background truth 
about dynamic systems. At it is most simple, chaotic change is a reality that can be understood 
without much trouble: if we were to observe two children throwing a message in a bottle off the 
back of a ship, it is not that difficult to foresee that the bottles could easily end up on beaches 
located in entirely different continents. As the ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle noted, “the least 
initial deviation from the truth is multiplied later a thousandfold”.233  
 
230 The East Antarctic Ice Sheet has a very different storyline towards collapse. The Basin of Ice in the East is sat 
on a much lower bedrock, but it is protected by a higher wall of rock around the fringe. Therefore, the glacier 
will remain untouched for longer, but once this protective wall is breached, and the warm sea water pours in, 
the collapse will be extremely rapid.    
231 DeConto, R.M., Pollard, D., Alley, R.B. et al. The Paris Climate Agreement and future sea-level rise from 
Antarctica. Nature 593, 83–89 (2021) 
232 Morlighem, M. et al. Deep glacial troughs and stabilizing ridges unveiled beneath the margins of the 
Antarctic ice sheet. Nat. Geosci. 13, 132–137 (2020) 
233 Aristotle, “On the Heavens” (271b8) 
