Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 234 
(BACK) 
 
coming face to face with. He would lambast his contemporaries for thinking that they were more 
advanced and civilised than the native people they were conquering. Rousseau contrasted their 
simple, uncluttered lives, that were lived in harmony with nature, with the grasping, anxious energy 
of the colonisers.      
     
This introductory thread of thinking is important for us in one key respect – and that is the role that 
innovation plays in the development of human society. In Hobbes’ darker political imagination, the 
world is a place of scarcity in which people will grab resources out of fear. This state of nature 
requires a strong rule of law to protect people’s property, otherwise there could be no possibility of 
any innovation. Why would anyone want to invent something, only for someone else to come along 
at the end of the process and just steal it?  
 
By contrast, in Rousseau’s thinking, the original world is a place of plenty. It is a state of nature in 
which there is the physical and psychological space for people to be innovative and creative. 
(Indeed, our two capuchin friends also showed a nice level of imagination and problem solving 
skills.) He thinks that our natural inclinations for contact and affection, will draw people together, 
into communities where we quickly advance our skills and relationships to a more complex level. 
 
Interestingly, although Rousseau rejects Hobbes view that human civilisation is doomed to scrap 
over limited resources, his long-term view finishes up with a similar conclusion. What Rousseau can 
foresee is that because of our inner psychological complexity, and because of our high propensity for 
innovation, what will happen is that humans will end up creating a situation in which “the world is 
not enough”.322 Rousseau thinks that, through innovation, modern society has finished up getting 
itself caught in a confused state of mind, where the boundaries between “needs” and “wants” has 
become toxically messed up. So, from a state of innocence and simplicity, our powerful curiosity 
drive, and our vulnerable need for affirmation, has led us into a claustrophobic world where we are 
edgy. A world where we are always on the look-out for more.  
 
Rousseau understood that a continual expansion of the orbits of our expectations and desires, led by 
our innovative responses to our environment, will ultimately drag us into conflict with each other.  
Surrounded by so many attractive objects of advanced art and science, we will struggle to maintain 
our symbolic identities. Fashion, culture, style and technological assets, whilst beautiful and 
remarkable expressions of human depth, will also bring with them a whole matrix of more complex 
human relations and relationships. He understood that for every new opportunity, there was a 
shadow of a missed opportunity; every new commodity, created a group of people who didn’t have 
it. Bluntly put, Rousseau understood “FOMO”.323  
 
The proliferation of extra goods and services through the development of science and technology 
would bring many comforts, but these cultural extras caused harmful side effects. The ‘flashback’ 
afforded by the indigenous Americans who lived authentic lives “within themselves”, confirmed 
Rousseau’s fear that modern society had started to get into a hyperventilated state about their 
identity. Where we end up “living in the opinions of others”. A life of with a continual background 
noise of status anxiety.   
 
This alienated, restless sense of self could be diagnosed as a condition of “affluenza”. 
 
Rousseau predicted that our manufactured desires would pull us into conflict, and that these 
divisions would be entrenched by all the legal and bureaucratic systems that would be created by 
 
322 A 1999 Bond film, not without its environmental themes (and sharply critical reviews on Rotton Tomatoes).  
323 The “Fear Of Missing Out”. 
