Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 118 
(BACK) 
 
Introduction 
 
Between a Rock and a Hard Place  
Aron Ralston was out exploring in the Blue john Canyon in 
Utah in 2003 when he fell down a crevasse, just ahead of a 
large boulder that then literally trapped him “Between a 
Rock and a Hard Place” (2004). With only two burritos, 
350ml of water and a blunt knife he quickly understood that 
there was no way that he could move the rock that crushed 
his lower right arm against the canyon wall. After being 
trapped for five days, he had to drink his urine and, 
expecting the worst, he carved his name, the date, and final 
messages to his family onto the sandstone wall right next to 
him. However, after waking up on the sixth day, he realised 
there was a chance that he could survive. His decomposing 
arm could be broken, and he could cut through the tendons 
and everything else with his blunt knife.  
It was a simple choice. Either he was going to die there with 
both of his arms remaining attached to his body – or he was 
going to survive, but without his lower right arm.  
Leaving the main arteries until last, he did the self-surgery in 
about an hour and then, after 10km of hiking during which 
he lost around 25% of his blood, he found a Dutch family on vacation who gave him food, drink, and 
everything else he needed. The extraordinary details can be seen in the movie “127 hours”.  
The blunt truth is that this is the kind of situation we are in with climate change. We do not have a 
choice — the law of gravity which pinned the 360kg rock onto Aron Ralston’s arm is just as stubborn 
as the laws of physics and chemistry that determine the atmosphere and the climate. 
Denial does not change the situation, neither does bargaining. Either we do immediate and major 
surgery to the infrastructure of our societies — with unprecedented levels of focus and investments, 
or we will push the climate system into a viciously spasmodic and unbalanced state. 
If we are not prepared to chop our arm off, if we are not prepared to force our reason to override 
our senses, we will not get out of the canyon we are stuck in. The participants of Extinction Rebellion 
protests and those who strike for the climate are not the idealists, they are the realists. The only 
reason they have adopted disruptive methods of protest is that so few people in the media or in 
power have understood the most basic equation of the crisis.  
Our situation is undoubtedly hard to accept, especially because this reality can only be clearly seen 
in graphs, data, and trends. Climate change does not appear before our senses196, like a crushed arm 
 
196 The increasing intensity and frequency of destructive weather events could be understood as our tactile 
contact with the crisis. However, any one dot on a scatter graph of events remains a dot (and not the curbed 
 
Figure 20, Aron Ralston 
https://www.armenianexplorer.com/article/1
27-hours 
