Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 345 
(BACK) 
 
Socrates  
It is a beautiful fact about the world that most people carry around in their hearts and minds the 
memory of a teacher who had a profound impact on their lives. Teachers play all kinds of roles in a 
child’s life: tour guide and explorers of the world; midwife to thoughts and values; magician with 
special powers; comforter and challenger; authority and support. Plato had, arguably, one of the 
world’s greatest ever teachers. Yes, he was a bit grubby (he didn’t wash or change his clothes); yes, 
he might have been a bit eccentric and enjoyed the public gaze too much; yes, he got on some 
people’s nerves. But he had a superpower: the ability to teach, through dialogue.  
His name was Socrates. He inspired Plato to found the Academy.  
However, that inspiration did not simply emerge from the love of the truth and of enquiry that he 
learnt from Socrates. The drive to establish the Academy also came from the dark tragedy that Plato 
suffered later in his youth: the trial and execution of Socrates.  
After a brief sketch of the war between Athens and Sparta in the previous chapter, it is now time to 
give this second traumatic event in Plato’s youth some attention.  
 
As a young man, Plato spent years in the company of a real Athenian celebrity: Socrates.  
To Plato, he was an inspirational teacher, an artful guru, and the dearest friend. He would have 
passed hours in the streets and plazas of Athens, listening to him engage with people through 
questions about pretty much everything: from justice to jealousy, from time to triangles, and from 
wax to wars. Socrates was the embodiment of free thinking and dialogue.  
We might expect that Socrates’ rugged commitment to the truth would be a welcome contribution 
to the world’s first known democracy. The Athenians were immensely proud of their culture, and we 
could justifiably expect them to be enthusiastic about the rigorous, open debates that he prompted. 
However, if you ask difficult questions too often, if you expose ignorance too easily, and if you 
challenge the status quo too much, it becomes much less welcome in the end.  
Famously, in 399BCE Socrates was put on trial for “corrupting the youth and introducing false gods 
to the city”. Both accusations were obviously fake, but everyone in the city understood the real 
reasons the court case. It was payback time. It was time for some prominent Athenians to ask 
Socrates some awkward questions.  
Plato would have witnessed the painful trial. The questions asked in the trial were not orientated 
towards the truth but towards revenge. They were not born out of a love of wisdom,434 but out of 
banal pride. He would have heard the pronouncement of the damning verdict. It was all a rather 
jarring end to the old man’s playful life.  
The paralyzing hemlock that Socrates drank, was delivered in a chalice by the executioner.  
 
434 “Philosophy” comes from two Greek words: philo = love & sophos = wisdom.  
