Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 102 
(BACK) 
 
 
The unwillingness of the Ultra High Developed nations of the world to cut back their emissions to an 
equitable rate is most vividly seen ‘with flags’ at the annual COP meetings. The delegates at these 
meetings who represent the countries of the “Global North” sit opposite the delegates from the 
“Global South”, and every year that the status quo is sustained, the injustices are deepened.  
Do we call this racism? Should we call it colonialism? There are flags on the desks of the negotiating 
tables, but no guns. There are Microsoft files, but no lines of armies. But if we don’t call it racism or 
colonialism, what do we call it?  
A key assertion of this chapter is put forward the argument that a form of colonialism is still at work 
in our foreign policy decision making. The basic numbers on emissions speak for themselves, but the 
recent upswing in the popularist vote has added clarity and volume to these narrow national 
interests. With the worst possible timing, just when we really need genuine global consciousness, 
there are powerful forces of fear that want to crop our moral imagination to a size that is far too 
small.   
b) Capitalism  
Can we not leave capitalism out of this? Doesn’t capitalism benefit everyone in the end?  
The short answer is no. An angry diagnostic finger also has to be pointed at the capitalist economy 
and society that now dominates global decision making. Capitalism might have been a juggernaut of 
material improvement (for some) over the past 150 years. However, that juggernaut is simply a 
vehicle for making profits – there is nothing in its drive for wealth that requires it to take account of 
external costs such as the environment. If a tiny majority would continue to make short-term profits 
from the status quo, there would be no contradiction in capitalism taking everyone over a cliff.  
Indeed, many of argued that the term “The Anthopocene” is too general a term for the bio-climate 
crisis that we have. Some have put forward the label “The Capitalocene” as more direct and realistic 
summary of the situation; in fact, given the purposeful ignorance of many industries to block out 
these external costs, it seems reasonable to go one step further call this “The Kleptocene”153. As 
 
153  Guernsey, Paul (2022). "The infrastructures of White settler perception: A political 
phenomenology of colonialism, genocide, ecocide, and emergency". Environment and Planning E: 
Nature and Space. 5 (2): 588–604. doi:10.1177/2514848621996577. ISSN 2514-8494. S2CID 233890511. 
