Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 83 
(BACK) 
 
The Space Above Our Heads  
Part Three 
 
 
 
THE UNITED NATIONS? 
 
 
Now to the matter in hand. The space above our heads that we call the atmosphere, and the 
international organisation that has been put in place to protect it.  
 
YOU HAD ONE JOB TO DO. 
 
On 4th June 1992, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) opened 
its doors for the Earth Summit in Rio. By 1994, the UNFCCC had entered into force with near universal 
membership (196 parties).124  
It had become very clear that humanity was stepping into very dangerous territory with global 
warming. The UN understood that the politicians needed regular updates on the science and regular 
reviews of the progress made in achieving the Convention’s objective. The convention’s ultimate 
decision-making body is the Conference of the Parties (COP) and, as part of their plan, they established 
annual COP meetings in which these reviews would take place. The first COP meeting took place in 
Berlin on 28th March 1995.  
The UNFCCC has a singular objective: “To stabilise greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere 
at a level which would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system”.  
YOU HAD ONE JOB TO DO 
 
There has been a long list of negotiated outcomes that often carry the name of the location in which 
they were agreed upon, and state various purposeful slogans. However, despite all the signatures, the 
troubling fact is that not a single COP meeting has made progress in achieving its sole objective. The 
reason for gathering hundreds of politicians, diplomats and scientists together every year is to achieve 
the goal that the UNFCCC was set up for, which is “to stabilise emissions”.  
If a manager of a football team were given a vast range of resources, personnel, training facilities, and 
expert analysis to achieve the aim of having that football team gain promotion to the next division 
and 30 years had passed and the team was still sliding down the divisions, there would be an 
impossible level of media scrutiny about that performance. There is certainly no way that the same 
manager would still be in the job. This is of course, just a metaphor; for example, the UNFCCC is an 
institution not an individual; in many respects, however, the metaphor should have even more bite 
because the stakes are not the fate of a football team, but rather entire economies and cultures.  
 
124 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change timeline. 
