Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 329 
(BACK) 
 
It is only after the critical thinking skills of the students have been refined by years of dialogue and 
analysis, it is only after a love of probing for the truth has been deeply established, that the Academy 
students could bring their minds and hearts to the attention of the biggest questions.  
Informed, articulate men and women (yes, Plato considered them equals in his school), would 
eventually be able to think though questions of justice and well-being. Graduates of the Academy 
would have the rational capacity to engage in complexity and detail, and also be able to handle, with 
the same rigour and clarity, questions of value and meaning. 
In clumsy summary, Plato’s Academy developed students with the qualities of mind and heart to 
tackle questions of both Physics and Metaphysics.  
 
The Climate Academy Programme 
(and whisper it, “love”) 
The Climate Academy programme is far shorter; our certificates can be issued much quicker.  
However, this shorter time frame does not sidestep the fact that The Climate Academy anticipates 
that its graduates will continue to love the truth. It is also committed to developing an 
understanding, of both the physical and metaphysical.  
And perhaps the word “understanding” is best understood split into two – “under  --  standing”.  
There is an important modesty implied in the English version of the word, in comparison to other 
European equivalents. The French “compris”, Spanish, “comprensión” and Dutch “begrip” are words 
which grasp and take knowledge, whereas the English word is more tentative and unassuming.  
All good science and human character is characterized by an awareness of its own limits. Indeed, 
there is even a deeper Platonic dimension to the word “understand” that implies reverence. If we 
love a subject, be it Maths or Physics, History or Biology, then when we are confronted with 
complexity, it arouses curiosity not fear. We carry a sense of wonder about the details that pulls us 
towards the deep. In fact, the word arousal was used on purpose. This is because in his remarkable 
work, “The Symposium” (c385-370BCE) Plato made a connection between sexual attraction and 
learning.  
There is something deeply beautiful about learning. A good teacher can inspire a curiosity and 
hunger for understanding reality that takes the student beyond the mechanical requirements of 
syllabus. Likewise, genuine love is not transactional, and it is happy to go the extra mile, even if 
things get difficult. We experience love as a pull, as something necessary which completely reframes 
our usual calculations of costs and benefits.  
This book, and the wider Climate Academy, has been designed with these Platonic principles in 
mind, and heart. It aims to develop a depth of understanding and a reverence for beauty and justice 
that will remain with its graduates well beyond their years in the programme.  
Indeed, as noted in the chapter on Climate Anxiety, a limited view of climate education is timid 
about presenting the full scale and depth of the crisis – out of a fear of being too negative. But this 
broadly consumerist framing of things fails to acknowledge something about learning and human life 
that is latent in all of us. We are creatures of purpose. When we “are onto something”, then the 
usual categories do not apply.  
