Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 106 
(BACK) 
 
grain."164165 And most famously, in the Bengal Famine of 1943, rice stocks were leaving India at the 
same time that the import of wheat was being blocked by London.166  
To press home the point: Churchill was part of an elite ruling class that grew up in the colonial 
period, in which racist views were still deeply normalized. Pointedly for this short section on food, in 
Rudyard Kipling’s famous poem, “The White Mans’ Burden” (1899),167 the white reader is invited to 
join in the divine, uplifting work of bringing civilization to the ‘lower races’. His jingoism jars in the 
throat, especially in this context, in the 3rd stanza,  
“Take up the White Man's burden— 
    The savage wars of peace— 
Fill full the mouth of Famine 
    And bid the sickness cease; 
b) Bangladesh - Cash crops and cash cows 
One of the reasons why India had become more vulnerable to starvation under British rule was the 
fact that agriculture had been increasingly dedicated to “cash crops”, whose final destiny was 
located in the economies of distant nations. From self-sustainability, land use shifted to the planting 
of tea and tobacco, opium and oilseed, coffee, jute, indigo and sugarcane.  
Good luck chewing through some indigo in a famine.  
Indeed, at a more abstract level, the ownership of land was also commercialized. People were 
pushed out of small, self-sustaining ways of life into a capitalist game of land acquisition (for the 
few) and rents (for the many).168 These changes occurred alongside the major shift in the Indian 
workforce from textiles to agriculture because local fabric tradesmen could not compete with the 
new imports coming in from the industrial factories of northern England. The spike in the supply of 
unemployed people led the market forces to demand that the wages of rural workers had to move 
downhill quickly.    
At many levels, the expansion of the East India Company, meant that people found themselves 
incorporated into a London centred world economy. It is therefore important to underline the fact 
that those who died of famine did not die outside of a world economy, as if they were some remote 
 
164 Ibid. p66.  
165 In fact, the India Meteorological Department and historical rain gauge reconstructions show that most 
famines struck when average rainfall in the southern interior peninsula deviated by 13% and 17% in the 
western interior. These margins are not sharply outside the norms, which further underlines British policy 
failures. Ray, R., Bhattacharya, A., Arora, G. et al. “Extreme rainfall deficits were not the cause of recurring 
colonial era famines of southern Indian semi-arid regions”. Sci Rep 11, 17568 (2021). 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-96826-2 
166 The Bengal Famine occurred during World War Two, and some academics and commentators have 
underlined this context in defence of Winston Churchill’s pivotal role in blocking famine relief. Such a defence 
of Churchill is rather undermined by his comments that “Indians are a beastly people with a beastly religion”, 
and that “they breed like rabbits”.  
 
167 Churchill was a great admirer of Kipling.  
168 The most common configuration peasants worked under the “Zamindari system”. A power hierarchy that 
was not unlike the European feudal system. This was certainly true in the Bengali region of the 1886 famine.  
