Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 150 
(BACK) 
 
Introduction 
 
On People and Planets 
 
Case study One:  
People 
 
I was 19, she was 18. It was long high school romance.  
I was at university; she was completing her A-Levels. 
It was Spring. There was a burst of cherry blossom on campus, and a burst of anticipation as I 
boarded the train. I was going back home to Manchester, to meet Kate for the weekend.  
 
Despite the distance between us, all the vital signs were good. We had been together for over two  
years. There had been a steady exchange of calls and letters, full of affirmation and affection, 
consideration and care; and most recently, an impossibly oversized card for Valentine’s Day had not 
fitted into my mailbox.  
 
However, when we met, she was not herself. There was no spring in her step, and no bounce in the 
conversation. Perhaps she was not well? Or maybe it was the fatigue of a day’s work in the coffee 
shop? We went for our traditional evening walk around the local lakes near her house. 
  
We were half-way through the walk when Kate said, “I think we should stop”.  
 
Fortunately, there was a bench close-by. I gestured towards it in sympathy, she was obviously not 
feeling 100%. “No, I think we should stop”, she insisted, as we sat down together. “It’s fine”, I said 
reassuringly, “we can rest here as long as you need”.  
 
“No, really, I think we should stop”. There was an extra twinge of angst in her voice. It was clear that 
she really wasn’t feeling well. I acknowledged her wish to go back home, but cautiously pointed out 
that it was the same distance home to complete the walk as it was to turn back the way we came.  
 
“No, you don’t understand what I am saying”, she said with bulging frustration. Choked by the 
emotion, and her brain fused out by the significance of the moment, Kate was struggling to find 
different words for what she wanted to say. Tears came.  
 
My brain jumped into a much higher gear, suddenly exploring alternative meanings. The words and 
the tears together would indeed make a lot of sense if she was ending the relationship. However, 
such an idea was so profoundly shocking and alien to me, my mind grabbed another conclusion. 
“Oh, you are pretending to dump me”, I chuckled - Kate was brilliant at many things at school, 
including drama.  
 
This desperate misinterpretation only made things worse of course. And thus in the last moments of 
our romance, I was confronted with the deeply uncomfortable choice of either facing reality, or 
really admiring her acting skills, as her shoulders shuddered in weeping misery. It should not have 
taken prolonged sobbing for me to have understood her simple sentence, but it did. The simple truth 
is that I really did think we were good.  
 
