Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 61 
(BACK) 
 
 The Carbon Budget  
 
What is the state of play looking forward? How much danger are we in now? How close are we to 
triggering different tipping points in the atmospheric systems? There is such a fog of information in 
the media and on the internet that is very difficult to get a secure understanding of our situation. 
Therefore, this module aims to put that right by identifying the key figures that lie behind all the other 
signals and noises.   
The fundamental question is “How many more gigatonnes of carbon can be emitted before we commit 
ourselves to a 1.5°C or 2°C rise?”86 It is clear that we cannot go on accelerating our emissions forever, 
there is a limit somewhere. Our bodies could handle a rise of 1.2°C warming for a short period, but a 
rise of 6°C would almost instantly kill us.  
The safest interference with the atmosphere would be as close to a 0°C rise as possible. Returning to 
the kind of climate that human civilization thrived inside for thousands of years should be the ultimate 
goal.  However, the World Meteorological Organization confirmed in 2019 that we have already 
achieved a 1.3°C increase.87 Having already overstepped a 1°C rise, human society has passed a 
threshold that scientists warned us that we should not cross decades ago.  
Given that anything over this line carries significant risk, the boundary for a global warming rise was 
set at COP21 in Paris in 2015. According to the Paris agreement, nearly every nation of the world 
committed “…to limit global warming to well below 2°C, preferably 1.5°C”.  
The reason that 2°C is identified as a key upper temperature limit is that if this line was to be crossed, 
we are firmly putting ourselves into a minefield of tipping points; and if we trigger these, the 
monumental forces of nature will just take over control of the situation and we will be faced with a 
cascading set of catastrophic circumstances. This is more fully explored in Module 8. 
Researchers are constantly refining their modelling of how the biosphere would respond to 
heightened CO2 levels. They have to consider so many variables when making these calculations. 
Dealing with such a complex and chaotic system necessarily means that there is a range of 
probabilities involved, however, we do have a very secure understanding of what is going on. There is 
a known carbon budget for 1.5°C warming and for 2°C warming. These limits come from the 2018 IPCC 
Report Global Warming of 1.5°C that was updated in 2021 by the IPCC’s Sixth Assessment Report 
(AR6). 
Where are we now?  
At the time of writing these budgets were 112 gigatonnes for 1.5°C and 712 gigatonnes for 2°C. It is 
probably best visualise these as buckets:  
 
86 There are some important qualifications to the numbers in the section. Firstly, these are for a 67% probability to limit 
warming to 1.5°C or 2°C since pre-industrial average. It relies on a rapid reduction of other greenhouse gas emissions and 
accounts for earth feedback systems. It does not include any negative emissions or temperature overshoot (then cooling). 
87 https://public.wmo.int/en/media/press-release /2019-concludes-decade-of-exceptional-global-heat-and-high-impact-
weather. 
