Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 136 
(BACK) 
 
Other systems in place around the planet exists as patterns of energy flow. These circulations, such as 
the Jet Stream and the AMOC (Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation), could be understood as 
conductors who control the mood and movement of all the other players in the planetary orchestra.  
Put all these components together into a map, and the major controlling hubs of life on Earth become 
clear. These blocks of energy, these flows and patterns are what determine everything else that goes 
on. These are the underlying cogs that have been locked in place with each other, in a settled 
equilibrium, for thousands of years.  
Indeed, it is important to stress that these cogs are interconnected. For example, about 4000 years 
ago the amount of solar energy reaching the Northern Hemisphere slightly faded, due to a change in 
the tilt of the Earth. This phase caused the horizontal flow of the Jet Stream to loop up and down in a 
more exaggerated way, which in turn intensified the strength of both the El Niño/La Niña cycle and 
the intensity of the Monsoons in India. These natural rhythms in the climate systems are well 
documented by physicists212.  We could say that inside our little pocket of geological time, such 
variations are ‘normal’.  
If we think back to the velodrome, they are like the natural patterns of the cyclists as they move 
around the track. The peloton will always stretch and compress at different times in the race as the 
riders play out their individual tactics in a reaction to the movements of the group. No two races are 
the same, but there is a common predictable pattern of ebb and flow that plays out, with a certain 
amount of elasticity.   
However, this predictability flies out of the window when a crash happens. One rider can be following 
his game plan, feeling in a strong position, and setting themselves up to make a move off the end of a 
bend when their back wheel suddenly gets hit by another bike. The chain reaction through the peloton 
will shred the race script, and it will just come down to luck if a rider survives the wreckage.  
The moment that the rider loses balance can be understood as a tipping point.  
Climate Change Modelling 
When the Industrial Revolution began, it was inconceivable that humans could have such a definitive 
impact on the Earth. The start of the industrial age was well before the surge in population from 1 
billion towards 8 billion, and well before the phenomenal acceleration of resource extractions that 
technology made possible.  
Yet, for decades now, it has become very clear that human interference with the planet is not just a 
matter of small details. What is at stake now is the stability of the entire operating system. It is clear 
that we are approaching some definitive tipping points in the natural world that would have seismic 
impacts within the lifetime of young people reading this text213.  
The deep complexity of the climate systems will always present an awesome challenge to scientists, 
it is an area of research that demands not only an understanding of Physics, Chemistry and Biology, 
but also a specialized understanding of the hinges between all three components, underpinned by 
 
212 One of the most basic rhythms in the background of all these parcels of planetary change was identified by 
the Serbian geophysicist Milutin Milankovitch. Before the help of an IBM was available, with a pencil, paper 
and tremendous level of skill and mental stamina (he did much of his work as a prisoner of war ***), he 
defined the various repeated patterns of the Earth as it orbits around the Sun. These Milankovitch Cycles 
happen on huge time scales. For example, it takes 100,000 years for the Earth to switch from a rugby ball to a 
more football shaped orbit, and back again. There is also a 41,000 year oscillation in the tilt of the Earth, and a 
25,771.5 year pattern to its ‘wobble’ (more technically known as the ‘Axial Precession’).    
213 There is already a body of evidence that suggests that certain points of no return have been crossed with 
the Antarctic Ice Sheets **. Nature ** 
