Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 349 
(BACK) 
 
When the walls of a system seem stacked against progress, Socrates shows us how to be a crucially 
disruptive brick in the wall.  
The power of a simple question has loaded into it a number of critical features:  
a) You are not expected to know the answers.  
 
This crisis is a Super Wicked one. Therefore, there is no simple solution anyway. There are so 
many interlocking scientific and social dimensions to the crisis.  
 
In the end, we need to stabilise CO2 emissions in the atmosphere that a level which is safe 
for human civilization. In the end, we will need to have radically different understanding of 
what it means to grow - but how we navigate our way towards that is so complex.  
 
The previous chapters of this book have outlined a map of the key physical and human 
boundaries of the crisis. Within these boundary markers the student is free to explore, 
without losing sight of those markers.  
 
b) You are not expected to be the solution.  
 
Atlas Syndrome, at various levels of intensity, is common amongst those who are engaged in 
the climate crisis. It can sometimes be a side-effect of a climate narrative that emphasizes 
the role of individual action (as explained and explored in Chapter 14 on Climate Anxiety).  It 
is true that a negation and punishment of the self, no matter how irrational, carries the 
positive psychological reward that you are at least “doing something”. The guilt involved 
Atlas Syndrome, although baseless, at least seems to restore agency to those who labour 
under its burden.  
 
It is important to step outside of this fake and damaging storyline.  
 
By contrast, there is real agency and reward in simply getting out into the civic space to 
present the true dimensions of the crisis and to advocate for systemic change.  
 
c) Expose limits  
 
Holding out the truth, resisting the temptation to fall into limited or fake solutions to the 
crisis is essential. One of the fundamental reasons why we are still accelerating 
unsustainable material growth and emissions is that the basic boundary markers of Physics, 
Chemistry and Biology have not been held out with clarity in the public space.  
 
Someone has to do this!  
 
Without these planetary limits clearly in view, there will be nothing to disrupt the status 
quo. In the absence of a proper critique of capitalism, why would there be any impetus 
towards the deep structural and technical innovations we need to find the exit.  
  
It is a signal of maturity to be comfortable with all the contradictions and paradoxes that 
arise out of complex system problems. It is important to own these knots and tensions, not 
