Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 233 
(BACK) 
 
Main Text 
 
1. The State of Nature  
 
As a parent of younger children, I was aware of the average amount of time that I could leave my 
children alone in a room before objects or insults started flying. When I was a student teacher in a 
school that was located in a deprived area of Manchester, I was keenly aware that popping out of 
the classroom, just to get some photocopies, or a fresh mug of coffee, was not a clever thing to do.  
 
I had once made a miscalculation about picking up a box of books, and my well-planned lesson on 
Aztec death rites suffered a fatal lapse of narrative flow. History lessons don’t normally involve 
practical sessions, and when I came back to the classroom, after tense, stone faced negotiations with 
the High Priest and the four members of his priesthood, we managed to avoid one. The High Priest 
lowered the blade of his 30cm plastic ruler from above his head; and the young victim was able to 
slide off his back to safety, from the sacrificial table to the floor, as the grip of the other priests was 
relaxed from his ankles and wrists.  
 
The view that many have come to accept about human nature, is that we are naturally belligerent. 
This view predicts that in the absence of any authority or control, we are prone to fall into conflict 
with each other. It is easy to think of different examples to confirm this pessimistic view, from 
children in a family or a classroom, all the way up to the chaotic violence that often erupts when a 
country goes through a sudden change in leadership.  
 
This dark view of human nature is most famously described by the English philosopher Thomas 
Hobbes who argued that life for humans in a “state of nature” (a place with no governance) would 
be, “solitary, poore, nasty, brutish and short”. This is not the place to indulge his masterpiece, the 
“Leviathan” (1651); other than to say that Jean-Jacques Rousseau disagreed with him.  
 
Rousseau thought that we were naturally co-operative, creative and empathetic. For a glimpse of his 
contrasting view of our “state of nature” we just need to rewind the clock on our human story, far, 
far back, and have a look at these two capuchin monkey’s who find themselves in a tricky situation. 
 
 
 
A probe into our deeper gene pool, and a click 
on the image on the left, will reveal a heart-
warming example of how our distant ancestors 
are capable of reasoned and collaborative 
behaviour.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indeed, Rousseau would invite us to think about how we recoil from seeing others suffer, and how 
sensitive we are to how other people consider us. Living at a time when so many Europeans were 
discovering new lands and ancient tribal people, Rousseau frequently celebrated the evident 
happiness and socially cohesive communities that the European explorers of North America were 
Figure 44, screenshot, "Monkeys cooperation and fairness". 
YouTube 
