Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 172 
(BACK) 
 
The answer is, Emmett Till. “I thought of Emmett Till, and when the bus driver ordered me to move 
to the back, I just couldn’t move”.  
A brief sketch of his case will demonstrate why.  
Emmett Till  
Emmett was an effervescent 14-year-old black boy. He had left his mother in Chicago to go on his 
cotton-picking summer visit of 1955 to the Deep South. The town where his cousins lived was called 
Money (near Mississippi). It was outside their local store where Emmett, a naïve city boy from the 
North, allegedly wolf-whistled at a white woman, Carolyn Bryant.  
The details are obscure, but the ending is not.  
A few days later, on 28th August, Emmett was kidnapped in the 
middle of the night, taken away in the back of a green pick-up truck, 
brutally beaten and shot. His skull was in bits. A bullet had delivered 
its explosive violent load with shattering force. One of his eyes was 
out its socket; and his naked body was bloated because he had been 
dumped into the Tallahatchie River - with a 35kg metal fan blade 
fastened around his neck with barbed wire.    
Upon receiving his body back in Chicago, his mother, Mamie Till, took 
the courageous decision to leave Emmett’s brutalised corpse in full 
view at his funeral. Those who saw the photo in Jet Magazine, or The 
Chicago Defender on 15th September never forgot it.  
On 23rd September , an all-white jury acquitted the two men who 
murdered him - after just 67 minutes of deliberation. A juror 
commented, "If we hadn't stopped to drink pop, it wouldn't have 
taken that long." The sticky summer heat of the courtroom was noted 
by many reporters at the time, but it was nothing compared to the 
stifling oppression of the status quo.  
Yet.  
That beautiful, but mutilated body in a suit. It was transformative. “Emmett Till’s body proved iconic 
because it could simultaneously express the brutalisation and the dignity of black life. It told them 
simultaneously what they were fighting against, and what they were fighting for”.266   
Education has been far too tentative in its acknowledgement of the climate crisis. It is 
unquestionably a difficult topic to handle. But we do not offer our students a ‘diet’ version of 
American History because the truth is too hard, we do not manicure aspects of the Third Reich 
because it could be upsetting.  
We should not flinch then with the Climate Crisis.  
Mamie Till did not whitewash her son’s murder, and we should not greenwash sustainable education 
either.  
 
266 Adam Green, author of “Selling the Risk”, speaking on the BBC, “The Ballads of Emmet Till”, Saturday 25th 
August 2018.  
Figure 29, Emmett Till, 13-years-old, on 
Christmas Day, 1954. Photograph taken 
by Mamie Till Bradley. 
