Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 38 
(BACK) 
 
diverse ecosystems), released 2.64 billion tons of carbon47, more than 1 % of the remaining carbon 
budget for 1.5C (83% likelihood).48  
In a dark grey parallel to this, we are currently producing 4 billion cubic tonnes of concrete every 
year. If this was made into patio slabs 2.5cm thick, it would mean that we would have been able to 
cover up 130,000 square kilometres of land with concrete - an area the size of Greece. This global 
concrete production is responsible for around 8% of all CO2 emissions annually49.  
 
Despite all this, you might have sometimes spotted a weed that has somehow managed to push its 
head and body through the tiniest of gaps in the tarmac of a road. The sheer tenacity and 
stubbornness of that plant is a helpful reminder of how quickly nature can restore itself - from 
whatever base of biodiversity is left in place.  
 
Indeed, the pause for breath in human consumption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic also 
provided a bit of space for nature to reclaim some ground. Among all the tragic stories of the 
pandemic there was a clear signal about what makes humans happiest – and those things were 
emphatically not material. We were reminded that our true nature is driven by the need for 
community and relationships, and by the sense of meaning that comes from the different projects of 
our lives.  
 
 
 
 
 
c. Nuclear 
 
Briskly then, nuclear power is given some attention.  
 
Our ability to harness nuclear energy is a vivid demonstration of how extraordinarily probing the 
human mind is. We can now unlock one of the elemental forces of nature through both fusion and 
fission – and although the byproduct of these processes is dangerous nuclear waste, this type of 
power generation does not cause greenhouse gas emissions once the carbon costs of building the 
station have been covered. In the absence of a war-like effort to leverage renewable green energy to 
the capacity required, nuclear power arguably remains an important component of a manageable 
pathway towards retaining a stable climate.  
 
 
Yet, the insights of Physics that took humans to a sub-atomic level of the universe did not just make 
nuclear power possible, it also facilitated the production of nuclear bombs. Every noble advance in 
science carries with it the possibility of ignoble consequences, the human condition a deeply 
conflicted one. This tragic double aspect of advancing knowledge was captured with vivid clarity by 
Mary Shelly in her prophetic novel, “Frankenstein” (1818).   
 
Her horror story “Frankenstein” (1818) depicts the harnessing of the ‘elemental principle of life’50 to 
animate the body parts of a gigantic cadaver by a scientist called Victor, a name that takes on a 
deeply ironic meaning as the novel develops. The clean slate of consciousness that the creature is 
 
47 https://news.mongabay.com/2021/03/global-forest-loss-increases-in-2020-but-pandemics-impact-unclear/ 
48 IPCC AR6 WG1: Climate change, The Physical Science 
49 https://www.chathamhouse.org/2018/06/making-concrete-change-innovation-low-carbon-cement-and-concrete 
50 James Whale’s popular adaptation of the book to cinema in 1931 depicts this as electricity.  
