Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 357 
(BACK) 
 
this crisis is driven by forces that are far bigger than any individual. Ambitious because we need get a 
grip on these systemic forces – and arguably the strategic approach with the most profound and 
system wide grip comes from the matrix of the law.  
This focus on the law has 3 different levels:  
1. Parliamentary laws. The ballot box remains a powerful instrument of change. Human society 
is capable of rapid transformation. Yes, we can be banal and myopic, but we can also be 
deep and open.   
2. COP (part of the UNFCCC). Both for climate and for biodiversity.  
3. Human rights laws that could be established through the courts. These could be national or 
international courts of human rights.  
There are many further dimensions to law, that these small pages cannot address – such as local 
laws, trade laws and so on. Given the improbability of significant positive parliamentary changes in 
law in the very short term, and given the malfunctioning apparatus of the UNFCCC, it seems best to 
aim for courts of justice.  
However it might play out, the central point of the Academy is simply to underline the power of the 
law to effect rapid and effective change.    
 
 
Conclusion 
 
We need to push the system into a new gear with something disruptive.  
“Disruption” sounds negative, but shaking up the system has always been disruptive. The needs and 
rights of the majority have always been disruptive to those in power.  The abolition of slavery was 
resisted by those who profited from the system because it was disruptive. Slave owners in 19th 
century America pointed out the marginally improving conditions of many slaves whom they owned.  
What did the all the true revolutionaries aim for? What did all deep transformations of society 
achieve? The answer is that they aimed at powerful legal change.  
As Martin Luther King insisted, “keep your eyes on the prize”.   
 
A Systems Understanding of the crisis is the first crucial step.  
This understanding has little value if it is not mobilized through civic engagement.  
But at the end of the day, all of this has to add up to a systems change.  
 
It is complex. But it is doable.  
