Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 126 
(BACK) 
 
consumptive, fossil fuel-powered economy then it will shunt global emissions into truly dangerous 
territory.  
Finally, the Low Developed (LD) countries could actually accelerate their emissions by 1.5% per year 
on average until 2100 and it would still be consistent with the 2°C budget because their emissions 
are so very little per person.  
 
And so, the contrast between the UHD and LD is startling. Those who have barely contributed to the 
crisis are, perversely, the ones who have and who will suffer the most. The injustice between the 
“Ultra High developed” and “Lesser developed” will be explored in more detail in the next chapter. 
However, one detail can punctuate the text here to illustrate how heavy the cost of climate change 
will be for the people who are most vulnerable to change ahead:  
 
On 15th March 2019, the monstrous typhoon Idai slammed into Mozambique (+1.4%). It caused a 
four-metre storm surge in Beira and an ‘inland ocean’ of over 3,000sq kilometres. The ensuing 
humanitarian crisis left hundreds dead, devastated infrastructure and destroyed thousands of 
homes, crops, and futures. There was also some very heavy-hearted cost counting in the 
neighbouring countries of Zimbabwe (+0.2%), Madagascar (+0.8%), and Malawi (+0.2%). One 
estimate put the total financial cost of the storm for the region at over $2.2bn.206  
 
 
Visualising the change required 
 
This chapter’s central goal, concerning the science, is to establish the vital statistics for our future on 
this remarkable planet. These key figures do lead the mind to wonder what such a level of emissions 
reductions would look like on the ground. What kind of change would be necessary to cut us loose 
from the climate crisis? In real terms, how much do we need to saw off with a blunt army knife?   
To help visualise what x% per year might look like, it could be useful to take the example of Germany. 
This is because the national emission cuts they need to enact are close to the average for all the UHD 
nations. Germany needs to reduce its emissions by 11% per year starting from now. 
Suppose for the sake of the thought experiment, that the transport industry in Germany makes up 
about 11% of their overall emissions (this is a fairly standard figure for transport in UHD countries). 
To make an 11% cut, Germany would then require the entire transport sector to be genuinely 
carbon neutral within one year. The example of transport is just illustrative. It is not that far off from 
being correct, but the percentage for each sector of the economy will be very different for each 
nation. The details do not really matter – it is the process that helps us see things more clearly. It just 
shows how deep and purposeful the actions that we must take are. 
  
Hypothetically, the next year would require the food industry to be carbon neutral for a further 11% 
reduction. Then in the third year, a massive investment in renewable green energy, and so on. . A 
plan should be put in place for everything so that the country could be carbon neutral before it 
exceeds its budget to stay within a 2°C rise.  
 
And so on. One of the most urgent areas of research and development should be into carbon 
capture – for the moment it only functions as a ‘concept’, that allows nations to conceal their lack of 
action with a shocking level of twisted accountancy. With a war like mind-set, massive investments 
 
206 "Global Catastrophe Recap: First Half of 2019" (PDF). Aon Benfield 
