Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 11 
(BACK) 
 
For those unfamiliar with the biblical narrative, it was here that Jesus shared his final meal with his 
12 disciples - a last moment together, before his arrest, trial and ritual self-sacrifice. It was in this 
Upper Room that the world view of the 12 disciples started to unravel in dramatic style, as Jesus 
tried to explain his fate in different symbols. He understood himself to be the embodiment and 
fulfilment of Jewish history. No more slaughtered lambs or bulls, no more burnt pigeons. This was 
the going to be it, because he understood himself as IT. These last days would have a monumental 
impact on human history. Indeed, his followers have been eating his flesh (bread) and drinking his 
blood (wine) every week ever since.  
From a distance, the details of any religion look truly odd, 
haphazard, banal even. The beliefs and customs of a religious 
community make little sense from the outside. How curious it can 
be, maddening even, to observe obscure religious rituals and 
practices. What on earth is going on in the heart and mind of the 
believer involved? With a bit of effort, maybe on a holiday visit to 
a temple, a museum, or maybe out of general curiosity, we can 
wander around on the outside of a religion, examining the details. 
We can try and make rational sense of it by looking at the facts, 
the context, and the claims made. They can appear well crafted 
and considered. But as an observer, from the outside, the whole 
thing will always lack synergy.  
By contrast, from the inside, it all makes powerful sense.  
You need to “get inside” this work of art by Colin Wilbourn (“The Upper Room”, 1998) to 
understand it, just like you have to belong to a religious community to understand what is going on.   
All the fragmentary, often contradictory aspects of life form part of a coherent, wider picture of 
reality. Religions provide a clear frame for understanding the world. Finding your place in a religion 
can be a profoundly moving experience.  This is especially true if it is a sudden moment of 
enlightenment, where everything just unexpectedly clicks into place.  
Such moments do not have to be religious of course. Probably the most common experience of 
finding synergies in the world happen when we find ourselves in a loving relationship. These 
relationships often don’t make much sense from the outside. Why him, why her? There is rarely a 
rational explanation for why we fall in love. Sometimes love is found with people who are utterly 
different to us. There are other places that we can find synergy of course: the starry night, a deep 
sunset, a moment of laughter in a group where you suddenly notice that you belong, a book, or even 
sometimes just the wandering mind on a bus that settles into a place of understanding.  
These symbolic moments can also happen reverse. A loss of meaning can be abrupt, usually for 
tragic reasons. Whatever the cause, the bright stars that make up the main constellations of our life, 
can fade or suddenly disappear. The map of meaning that we used to guide our decisions had made 
so much natural sense, but it can get confusing and fail us. Like in that clearing by the river, 
everything in the world can revert to looking like dead wood to us.  
Just there. Random. Shapeless. Obsolete.  
The search to find connections and shape in the events of our life can be deeply frustrating and 
desperate when everything appears so broken and disjointed. We are insatiable storytellers. It is one 
of the most wonderful and deepest marks of being a human being. At a gut level we want to be able 
