Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 339 
(BACK) 
 
 
 
 
2. The danger of ignoring metaphysics 
The subject “Physics” is concerned with providing a clear account of matter and energy, from the 
subatomic to the furthest boundaries of space and time.  
Metaphysics is the consideration of everything that lies beyond this. In ancient Greek, the word 
“meta” (μετά) means “after” or “beyond”.427 Metaphysics addresses the fundamental nature of 
things, and extends to questions of value and purpose. It should be clear from the opening section 
about the Academy that Plato considered the universe as one coherent whole. The eye of the 
students’ focus might slide from detail of the bee to a wider contemplation of beauty, but everything 
was connected and part of the overall system. There was no disconnect between physics and 
metaphysics. 
Today, it is not uncommon for people to consider that metaphysics is a thing of the past. In their 
reductivist world view, they would argue that issues of meaning, God and purpose are just the 
hyperactive, hyperventilating, side effects of an overactive monkey brain. For many people, it is 
absurd to think that bees and beauty are connected in any deeper way other than the fact that they 
start with the same letter. If you are anti-Platonist, then it is the same for Vermeer and values, and 
for Mozart and meaning.  
For many hundreds of years (arguably since the impact of the philosopher Descartes), Western 
culture has divided the universe into two distinct dimensions: mind and matter, material and 
spiritual, the mechanical and the meaningful. Or in other words, a dualism of the physical and the 
metaphysical.  
This is not the place to slice open one of the main arteries of debate in the body of philosophical 
literature. Whole libraries of books have been written about the proper way to understand the 
relationship between these two seemingly distinct aspects of the world.  
However. There is an important point to be made about metaphysics that is valid428, whatever the 
truth is about God and ultimate reality.  
The point is this: we cannot opt out of values. There is no such thing as being “neutral” in ethics. We 
are committed to a set of priorities in life just by being here. Every choice: to act, or not to act; to do 
this or that, is a commitment to something. If, when asked “Shall we celebrate Valentine’s Day?” you 
proudly respond to your partner, “I am remaining neutral this year”, it will quickly become clear that 
this is not a neutral response.  
We cannot avoid making choices that define what we value.  
 
427 Plato had a student, Aristotle, who also set up his own school, The Lyceum. An early editor of Aristotle’s 
written work classified any book listed after his Physics as Metaphysics. The first books were concerned with 
things that changed & the later books with things that do not change. Clumsily put, for these ancient Greek 
thinkers, the material world is in a state of continual change, whereas values and meaning belong to an 
unchanging dimension of reality.  
428 In Logic, the word “valid” has a strict meaning, close to “proven”. Here it signals something much looser.  
