Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 156 
(BACK) 
 
even if it is true or well intentioned, can be flipped by a confused or conflicted heart to appear as 
false, as an attack or as a negation.252   
The End Game 
Getting entrenched into a false view of the world, others or ourselves, is all too easy. We are all 
prone to getting the frame for our experiences skewed badly.  
It is not just distorted or dysfunctional world views that we become attached to. Perhaps more 
predictably, we are also prone to getting entrenched in world views that work; sometimes, in fact, to 
world views that work extremely well. Such a situation might not be a problem at all. However, in 
both unhealthy or healthy worldviews, problems and inconveniences get masked.  
Any errors, losses or unresolved problems in a system can be ignored or bypassed because the other 
strengths in play protect it from further scrutiny and stress. It is as if a dominant worldview has an 
immune system that blocks any alien ideas from getting through into the central operating unit that 
“tells the story”.  
Any build-up of failings can, of course, be benign. If, however, these dysfunctional features of a 
system are serious enough, and if they are kept out of sight and reckoning for too long, they will 
eventually reach a critical mass.  
Or in other words, a tipping point.  
In such a moment, the breakdown of that system is sudden and dramatic.  
A feature of systems dynamics is that there is a clear contrast between the slow growth that occurs 
when a system is functioning successfully, and the rapid collapse that happens after a tipping point 
has been crossed.   
The final moments of the party game ‘Twister’ offer a 
helpful metaphor for those last moments. After a slow 
build-up of different positions with an increasing level of 
entanglement, “Left Foot on Red”, is declared after the 
arrow stops spinning. Everyone on the dotted mat, and 
everyone observing, knows that this move is simply 
impossible.   
As the hapless leg extends towards the red dot, the ball 
of human spaghetti enters its final moments of strain… 
then it transforms into something more like Lasagna.  
Relationships can so easily get knotted and stretched. In 
the end, the only possible release is a collapse. “I was 
 
252 See “Nietzsche Tackles Climate Change”, for a fuller exploration of the details about the psychology of truth 
and power. 
 
Figure 23, 
https://boardgamegeek.com/image/196428/twister 
