Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 138 
(BACK) 
 
Main Text 
 
Going through the gears 
We are prone to have a false sense of security about the future, because it is natural for us to assume 
that it will more-or-less match the past. Our limited imagination about what could happen ahead of 
us is normally useful, because it makes our lives efficient and liveable. It would be exhausting to 
continually think through the vast range of possibilities and all their consequences. However, this blind 
spot can be dangerous. Sometimes it is important to pause and do the big macro thinking. The threat 
of climate change insists that we take a step back and look at the pathways that we are on. The acute 
dangers of tipping points require us to be attentive to how close we are to pushing the system out of 
balance.  
This need to step back is partly due to the fact that we are predominantly linear minded bipeds. This 
is hardly surprising, since most of the time we only have to deal with linear change. For example, if we 
walk one kilometre, we have a good sense of being half way to our home that was 2km away; if we go 
and get a beer at half-time in a football match we have a good sense of how long our team needs to 
stay ahead to win the match; and if we earn €10 an hour for chopping vegetables, the it is obvious 
that 4 hours in the kitchen will earn us €40. 
Simple.  
The problem is that we are being blind-sided by a different kind of change – the exponential variety.  
And this kind of change operates in a very different gear.  
Exponential Change 
Exponential change is a much tougher type of change to hold clearly in our minds. Exponential changes 
play out in modes that make less intuitive sense to us.  
An often-quoted example of this type of change involves a legend about an Indian King who is given a 
beautifully carved chessboard. When he gratefully asked the court advisor who gifted it what he could 
offer him in return, the advisor said that he simply wanted to be given a single grain of rice on the first 
square, two grains and the second, and four on the third… and so on. This seemingly modest request 
was accepted by the King. However, it soon turned out to be impossible to fulfil. The 21st square on 
the board required over a million grains, and the 41st square required over a trillion, and there was 
simply not enough rice in the world to properly fill the final 64th square. More precisely, it would have 
required 264 -1 (or 18,446,744,073,709,551,615 grains). Or maybe 18 quintillion grains of rice if the 
modest vizier would be willing to round his request down a bit.  
In our real world, the formidable ability of the fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster) to multiply in number 
in our kitchen during the summer months is a notable illustration of exponential growth. One lazy 
failure to deal with a banana skin can trigger a crazy hygiene war with every scrap of food for days 
after219. A failure to deal with a small outbreak at the start makes it very difficult indeed to contain the 
 
219 More tragically, when my mother was diagnosed with terminal cancer it was difficult for everyone to handle 
the ambiguities about the timescale of the disease. The Macmillan Nurses offered the most remarkable 
support, and when I confessed my struggle with this particular issue, I was very helpfully advised that if I see a 
change in her condition in months, then I can be confident that she has months to live; and when the 
noticeable change shifts to weeks and days, the same will be true.  
