Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 314 
(BACK) 
 
It is something that seems to be in play from stars, to cells and from marriages to markets… and so 
on. It is therefore in play in our economies, societies, and relationships. It is in play in physical and 
biological systems. 
In short, and more to the point, it is in play in the sustainability crisis.  
This cycle provides the final vantage point of understanding the climate crisis.  
 
Some guided tours  
Like with Piraeus, let’s do a quick guided tour of the loop.  
First with abstract language, depicting the dynamics in the rawest way. Then, because this 
description will sound rather odd, with a real-life example & then a direct description of how the 
Adaptive Cycle plays out in the climate crisis.  
An abstract tour 
This little tour will introduce the main points of the adaptive cycle loop and its abstract language of 
“breakthrough”, “reorganization”, “growth”, “conservation”, “rigidity trap’, “breakdown” & 
“release”.  
Let’s drop in for a tour, starting in the middle, after the release point.  
The Omega point (Ω) is the moment in the complex systems cycle when things are at their most 
chaotic. This is a situation where there things extremely open. In the absence of patterns or order, 
there are a very high number of connections possible between all the different elements in play.  
The movement towards the Alpha point (α) happens because some combinations of elements are 
successful and tend to stick and replicate themselves. In this emergent phase of the cycle there is 
still a degree of openness, a capacity for change and adaptation because the build-up of established 
capital is still small compared to the whole system. This reorganizational period has a wide range of 
possible states ahead that the system could settle into.  
Growth (r) kicks in when a central type of capital in the system becomes dominant. In this 
movement to the left of the ribbon, the advantageous characteristics of the successful elements of 
the regime enable the development of structures that are efficient and powerful. However, this 
growth is at the expense of the regime’s flexibility because the dominance of that capital has 
marginalized and weakened the capacity of alternative nodes of development to arise.  
The dominant feature of the system, in the absence of any significant competition, has such a 
growth advantage that the dynamics move into the conservation phase (K). The adaptive cycle now 
enters into the fourth and final stage because this dominance becomes problematic. The advantages 
that created the capital in the system have created entrenched flows of resources. Stability becomes 
stiffness, dominance becomes dormancy. This lack of openness and agility takes the system into the 
very last phase – “The Rigidity Trap”. The system is now vulnerable to external shocks, and it has no 
effective capacity to adapt to internal problems. There are a low number of key nodes that could 
generate variation. This stiffness makes the entire system heavily dependent on the status quo to 
survive.  
