Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 53 
(BACK) 
 
All the latest national data for resource extractions can be found at CUTxpercent.org, alongside all 
the latest emissions data in the table. The two issues are deeply connected.  
 
To live sustainably, the IRP has put forward an average of seven tonnes per person per year of 
resource extraction75. As Michael Wadleigh and Birgit van Munster have noted, “The alarming 
evidence is that the destruction of nature by global extraction of natural resources has nearly 
quadrupled in the last 50 years. Astonishingly, the next 35 years of natural resource extractions and 
fossil fuel emissions are projected to equal the last 300,000 years (the entire time our species has 
walked on the Earth).” 
 
The Club of Rome put it very succinctly back in 1972: there are “Limits to Growth”.76  
 
The conclusions of that groundbreaking work were hotly disputed, and it still causes Libertarians 
sleepless nights (for the wrong reasons). Driven by data, savvy modelling and the new power made 
possible by the invention of the IBM computer, “Limits to Growth” plotted out long term 
environmental scenarios.  The forecasts made 50 years ago have proven to be robust. Yet, even if 
they were to have been entirely wrong in their details, the basic assumptions of the book remain 
extremely pertinent. Namely, that on a finite planet there will be limits to growth, and once those 
limits are understood we should measure, as best we can, the wisest pathway towards them.  
 
The problem is that we live in a culture in which the thought of a limit creates a tremendous range of 
cognitive dissonances. Our culture is predominantly a capitalist one; of course, there are 
innumerable cultures and subcultures, but the background grammar of how we think has been 
strongly flavoured by the emergent capitalist economy. The ground rules of capitalism have become 
so normalized at both an economic and social level that is genuinely difficult to imagine human 
civilization functioning inside another paradigm of values.77  
 
The capitalist operating system might bring many advantages, but we should not be shy about 
pointing out all the fundamental disadvantages. Indeed, these disadvantages can no longer just be 
considered as “lefty” ethical concerns about equality and alienation. These disadvantages must now 
be upgraded to a different category of consideration: existential threat.  
 
We are now crossing many planetary boundaries. The game of capitalism was remarkably 
productive, but in the absence an articulate, science based ecological framework for that growth, we 
are now living in on planet that might soon bite back with formidable force.   
 
 
 
75 United Nations Environment, International Resource Panel. Managing and conserving the natural resource 
base for sustained economic and social development (2014). 
76  “The Limits to Growth” (1972), written by Donella H. Meadows, Dennis L. Meadows, Jørgen Randers, and 
William W. Behrens III, representing a team of 17 researchers.  
77 Like with a language, any participant can use its grammatical structures and rules effortlessly without 
understanding the most basic rules of operation. It is even difficult to explain these rules retrospectively to 
someone who lives inside that language because everything functions so naturally.  
