Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 14 
(BACK) 
 
The humans alive in 2050 will not judge us by our small actions, they will judge our efforts by the 
overall result – that can be measured with the greatest accuracy as greenhouse gas concentrations 
in the atmosphere.   
Just to press home the importance of this systemic understanding of temperature, a consideration 
of the wider systemic context of the plight of the polar bears is illuminating. The rapid heating of the 
arctic circle (that is far above the global average) will soon cause an ice-free summer at the North 
Pole. The subsequent loss of reflective white snow and ice will mean that the sun’s thermal energy 
will be hungrily sucked into the dark arctic water at an exponentially faster rate. Ice with snow has 
an albedo (Î±) of 0.9 which is close to the maximum of 1 – so our polar regions are now bouncing 
monumental amounts of thermal energy back into space. Whereas an open ocean just loves to suck 
up the heat with an albedo of approximately 0.06.  
Warmer seas, warmer, thicker atmosphere, and the ice rate loss accelerates… and a vicious feedback 
loop has kicked in. A powerful chain reaction that will have massive knock-on effects around the 
planet. Not least because the settled disc of cold arctic air that currently circles around the Arctic 
Circle (the Polar Vortex) will be become decentred and destabilized, and then it will eventually 
dissolve.  
This is the climate equivalent of the front wheel of your bike falling off whilst going very fast.  
Who knows where all your body parts are going to end up?  
Polar bears, people, phytoplankton, pineapples, probiotics, pine trees, potatoes, peas, penguins, 
pumas and prawns, it is all part of the same biological system. Climate change is a systemic 
emergency. And if our thinking about climate is not systemic our responses to the threat will never 
be adequate. As educators we have a duty of care to bring our older students to this fuller 
understanding. Climate change requires systems thinking and systems change, as the proper context 
to any individual action.  
No one who understands the depth of the cuts in emissions required would talk about recycling as if 
it were remotely significant. No one who understands that the root cause of our continually rising 
global emissions is excessive consumption, would think that Sweden or the UK is an environmentally 
friendly country. Whilst millions of individual people rightly try to reduce their carbon footprint, 
there are simply no laws in place at a system level to stop governments and corporations from 
investing trillions of dollars in monumentally destructive infrastructure and business projects, as if 
there was no carbon limit at all. 
We are wired to see details and particulars. We are primarily sensory animals. And far too many 
citizens have only ever been provided with a primary school level understanding of the problem.  
We need the key science, and we need powerful art to bring the details of our situation together. 
We urgently need to provide everyone with a proper view.  
This is what the Climate Academy was designed to do. It plots out in 15 chapters, tree by tree (so to 
speak), the systemic crisis that we are in. It is mindful of the best place to sit to see it all in its proper 
scale and dimensions. It is careful to plant the key posts of natural science and human science firmly 
in the ground. The central pillar, the CUTx Index (Chapter 7) is central to all the projects that the 
Climate Academy engages with. The data and analysis in this chapter has been endorsed by the 
world’s most eminent climate scientists. The CUTx index is a simple, clarifying set of numbers that 
show what each nation in the world must do to avoid us going over the 1.5°C and 2°C warming 
