Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 338 
(BACK) 
 
Given the fact that bees play such a critical role in our food supply chain, it would be reasonable to 
expect that somebody somewhere is keeping an eye on the overall bee population. A rational person 
would not object to making the survival of the bee population a headline global imperative.  
As we know. Lamentably, it is not.  
We are more aware of the value of buying Bio-Honey than the background market forces that 
encourage farmers to use pesticides (a major reason for the falling bee populations). Bio-Honey is a 
product, an object, a visible detail. It is clear to our senses; it even appeals to many people’s earnest 
worries about the environment. The existential threat that the death of bees pose to the planet’s 
operating system is abstract, it is dispersed into the interplay between policy and law, the major 
agrobusinesses and micro businesses. It would require a PhD to work out what the optimal shopping 
trolley would be, to best support the lives of the bees. The most obvious starting point would be to 
only buy organic food, but this choice takes place in a whole matrix of socio-economic conditions.  
Bio-Honey is good. There is no doubt about it.  
However, the collapse of the bee population could so easily happen in our blind spot.  
It is quite possible that in the near future, after the bees have almost disappeared, we look back and 
wonder how did that ever happen? Questions will be asked, but it will not be that easy to point a 
finger of blame.  
 
Our economies are set up to deliver specialisms.  
Good.  
But this drive for depth and focus has to be held in continual dialogue with the bigger picture.   
 
Our schools are set up to deliver subject specialisms.  
Good.  
But it is profoundly reckless, absurd even, that we do not have an eye on the bigger picture.  
 
Sorry, children of 2100, our syllabuses and timetables were too full to give enough attention to the 
Sixth Mass Extinction event.  
 
 
This is our blind spot.  
 
 
 
 
