Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 198 
(BACK) 
 
We all have a comfortable view of life on the sharp, silky-smooth widescreen that we call our minds. 
Glitching images are thankfully only a problem that we get with electronic equipment; either 
because of a bad wi-fi connection, or because of a hard drive with indigestion. Many of these 
glitches can just be resolved with a simple push of the F5 button, or by clicking “restart”.  
However, the idea behind this short reflection is to point out the potential value of motion 
blindness. There could actually be a value in having a ‘broken’ view of the world.  
Indeed, the ‘mad’ were sometimes afforded genuine respect in Medieval society as ‘truth-sayers’ (if 
they were not classified as possessed). Their unhinged minds were considered loose enough to catch 
truths otherwise out of reach for normal people. Could it be the case that LM has a condition that 
actually points us towards something truer, not something misleading or false? Seeing the flow of 
the world in slices, with its stuttering, continual pausing of life might actually lead us to some deeper 
insights about ourselves and our situation. 
The following paragraphs will put forward the argument that this is true - for a particular blind spot 
that we have about ‘change’. And, by the end of this reflection, the more specific problem of climate 
change. 
Getting a good view of change 
When life flows in front of our eyes with such ease and natural drift, when the next moment is 
indistinguishable from the last, it becomes more difficult to measure change. The liquidity of time 
makes it a real challenge to mark out important moments or patterns. We are quickly lost in the flow 
of the action. Metaphorically speaking, the Rugby coaches seem to have the right idea when they 
watch their teams’ performance from high up in the stadium (and have the help of TV monitors); 
compared to the flattened perspective that Football managers have to deal with on the touchline. 
Likewise, a turn to Philosophy can help get the problem of change more clearly into view. 
 
 
The Sorites Paradox 
Philosophy has given us the useful idea of the ‘Sorites Paradox’. 
The word ‘sorites’ comes from the Ancient Greek word for ‘heap’ (soros, σωρός). This ancient puzzle 
comes from the fuzz that is caused by some of our concepts. If we look very closely at ‘a heap’ we 
can see what the paradox is all about. The problem is this: one grain of sand does not make a heap, 
neither does two, nor three, nor four… So, whilst it is irrefutably the case that heaps of sand do exist, 
and that these are made up of many grains of sand, the weird truth is that we cannot point 
accusingly at any singular grain of sand and blame it for causing ‘a heap’ to happen.  
Indeed, what if this ‘moment’ is fundamentally elusive? What if it does and does not exist?  
You can go to Morecambe Beach if you doubt the existence of heaps of sand. But good luck 
interviewing the individual grains of sand to get a clear answer about the formation of their 
collective identity. 
