Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 203 
(BACK) 
 
 
Reflection Number Five 
Thinking Fast Thinking Slow – A tale of Two Dans.  
 
Common sense would tell us that no rational person, with a sound level of education would question 
the science of climate change. Common sense would also suggest that no rational person would fail 
to act, as personal, professional or civic agents in response to the threat.   
 
Unfortunately, of course, we often lack common sense.   
 
Daniel Kahneman 
 
The Economist and Psychologist Daniel Kahneman won the Noble Prize for his book, “Thinking Fast 
and Slow”. This work offers a window on how the mind processes information in two distinct ways.  
 
He classifies them as: 
‘System 1’: the fast, instinctive network.  
‘System 2’: the slow, ‘scientific’ network.  
 
Kahneman gives us some details: “The operations of System 1 are fast, automatic, effortless, 
associative, and often emotionally charged; they are also governed by habit, and are therefore 
difficult to control or modify. The operations of System 2 are slower, serial, effortful, and 
deliberately controlled; they are also relatively flexible and potentially rule-governed.”290  
 
You could sense the two network speeds at work in 
your brain if you were to try and eat a chocolate 
cockroach. ‘System 1’ would immediately tell the 
brain to recoil from the action. However, ‘System 2’ 
can over-ride that instinct by slowly, persistently, 
reminding the brain that, according to the analysis, 
there is nothing to be alarmed about. ‘System 2’ 
thinking has the power to mobilise your hand to 
reach out and take one of those chocolates, and 
with a bit of concentration it can give you the clarity 
of mind to put it in your mouth.  
 
A primary goal of education is to enhance and strengthen the slow burn, ‘System 2’ reasoning skills 
that enable us to think and act above a merely spontaneous relationship with the world. The power 
of ‘System 2’ skills makes scientific advance possible and democratic debate possible – both require 
an ability to think outside of the self in a measured and analytical way.  
 
One of the serious brakes to climate action in recent years has come from the upswing in support 
from the far right of the political spectrum – a culture that leans heavily on ‘System 1’ type thinking 
to gain support. The ballot box success of Donald Trump and “Vote Leave” in Brexit 2016 could be 
attributed to the way in which their slogans and messaging appealed to some powerful feelings at 
 
290 ‘Maps of Bounded Reality’, Kahneman 2003. 
Figure 39, Screenshot, PankoBunny, YouTube, チョ
コ入りゴキブリさん 
