Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 308 
(BACK) 
 
PART TWO: The Root of the Problem   
 
Getting the clearest view of things 
 
At the start of the chapter, various landmarks and cities were remembered for their symbolic 
importance. Many famous symbolically important places are part of our cultural memory because 
something tragic happened there.  
It is hopefully clear now why the Piraeus triggered the tragic imagination of the Athenians when 
Plato was writing his book. And why that location is really illuminating for thinking through the 
climate crisis for us in the 21st century.  
In this conclusion, it is vital to zoom in on one feature of the Piraeus and how Plato depicted it. What 
really matters for our guided tour of this place from a climate change perspective is the fact that 
Plato set his book in the past. He wrote his book in 380 BCE, but it is set sometime just before 
415BCE (the year in which the Athenians lost so catastrophically to the Spartans).  
As we have just seen, the characters involved in the drama of the ‘Republic’ were dead at the time 
that he was writing. We see the posse of people hanging out with Socrates; their backs are turned to 
the threat. We see them amble down to Cephalus’ house in a state of happy ignorance about what is 
just about to happen.  
If this were a modern horror film, then the viewer would see a man moving ever closer, holding a 
kitchen knife. This approaching danger would be framed over the shoulder of the unsuspecting 
victim. In cinema history, this effect is most famously captured in the bathroom of a motel in 
‘Psycho’ (1960). The innocence of the woman in the shower, the tentative music, the shadowy 
movements... then suddenly, the ripping back of the curtain and the screeching violins that mark out 
the plunging staccatos of the knife into the body.  
It is this sharp twist in the relevance of the Piraeus that is crucial. Yes, the Piraeus was the scene for 
both the boom and the bust of Athenian society – but Plato is driving home a deeper point about 
thinking more deeply about progress.  
The central symbolism of the Piraeus is that it is so difficult for a 
civilization to see its own demise happening. This is not simply a 
question of not being able to see the future. The paradox in play with 
the Piraeus is that the downfall was hidden inside the very things that 
seemed to be strong and good. The Piraeus harboured the most 
formidable naval fleet in the world, it sponsored a booming economy. 
Cephalus was a rich man, who lived a virtuous life. It is this feature of the 
Athenian collapse that is particularly interesting and poignant.  
There is no slogan, nor quote from ancient Greeks culture which states 
that, “your greatest strength is also, often your greatest weakness”. 
