Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 315 
(BACK) 
 
Without any room to adapt, with such a low level of resistance, the only exit from this rigidity trap is 
collapse.  
This collapse is notably rapid and violent. Such a crisis creates a lot of disorder. This open chaotic 
space is the Omega point (Ω). The point where everything started a few paragraphs ago.  
The Adaptive Cycle then starts another loop.  
And so on.    
(It is interesting to note that one feature of complex system dynamics is that there is often a ‘ghost’ 
of the old system in the new one. This memory is technically known as “hysteresis”.) 
 
Applied examples 
 
a) Relationships in a classroom   
At the start of any new school year, as students from a wide range of backgrounds are thrown 
together into a class, there are a huge range of possible friendship groups and countless possibilities 
for what might happen between everyone. The first day in September of a new school is full of 
tentative, awkward “Hellos” and introductions. However, soon enough, friendships start to form and 
patterns of seating, talking, and conversations become established. It is no longer necessary to 
introduce yourself, in the place of vulnerabilities and a radical openness, there are now some fairly 
stable identities and familiarities. This is the start of the growth (r) phase 
Over months and years, these friendship cells with their identities and narratives become deeply 
embedded. Nicknames, in-jokes about certain episodes in the canteen or a school trip, when 
arguments of tiffs between friends happen, there is a stable background set of experiences and 
shared values to fall back on. Even if things get a bit turbulent, either due to the impact of external 
events or because someone is maybe fighting some inner demons, the friendships are worth 
conserving – and it is fairly easy to do so. This can be understood as the consolidation (K) phase.  
In time, the habits of the group might grow stale, and the deeper emotional engagements can lead 
to more serious disputes. The identities and expectations formed in the group can be hard to shake 
off, and any move away from the group will entail a loss of social capital. When you have been with 
one group of friends for so long, it seems rather inauthentic or just incongruous to just jump to 
another cluster of people who have their own deeply established narratives. Class groups that form 
in school are normally rooted to that physical and social space. Spending so much time together in a 
closed environment, in even smaller social units, can amplify the chances of disagreements 
escalating to an intense level.  
If a knotted set of relationships cannot be loosened by counsel or compromise, then a breakdown 
will happen. Perhaps a group of friends, drawn together at first by their differences, now finds that 
those opposites are nothing but contradictions. The habits and familiarities known by the group 
used to be comforting and enjoyable, but they have now flipped, and they just grate, irritate and 
injure. The lack of openness and diversity in a friendship group has hardened into a rigidity trap.  
The good news of course, is that this fragmentation and disorder creates a new openness and 
possibilities. Perhaps a chance to practice forgiveness, and establish a deeper, richer equilibrium. In 
