Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 25 
(BACK) 
 
These “Warming Stripes”7 demonstrate just how radical the shift in the average global temperature 
has been since the start of the industrial revolution. The first stripe of colour, on the left, represents 
the average global temperature for the year 1850; the last stripe of colour, on the right, represents 
the latest thermal data.8 The contrast between the cool blue on the left and the hot reds on the right 
is vivid. Behind every stripe of colour there is a huge store of raw data collected from various scientific 
instruments.  
 
Things are getting hotter. Given the complexity of our Earth climate systems, it is not a surprise to see 
that the pattern of change is irregular. However, the acceleration of change in recent decades is 
emphatically clear. The climate crisis is very real.  
We are bipedal mammals, living day to day. It is true that in our normal everyday experience of walking 
outside in the wind, the rain or the sunshine, it is impossible for us to get a reliable picture of long-
term changes. A problem compounded by the fact that we can only be in one place at once. This has 
often been likened to the difference between a tree and a forest. When you are in the middle of a 
forest you can only see the trees around you; each tree is like a weather event. By contrast, the whole 
forest remains out of sight. Not only can you not see the trees hundreds of miles away, but the forest 
has been around for hundreds, thousands or perhaps millions of years. The forest, in this fullest aspect, 
is like the climate. One dead tree does not signify anything about the forest, you need to be able to 
look at the bigger picture. One flood or storm, one cold or warm winter, does not signify anything 
about the climate. You need to have much deeper and wider data to be able speak scientifically9. 
Thankfully, Science can make the reality of the climate crisis crystal clear. It can summarise a vast 
amount of data, from different times and different places, into a small space on a page for our eyes 
and brains to see it.  
 
So things are getting hotter.  
 
Why is this such a problem?  
 
The scale of the problem led 196 nations of the world to sign up to “The Paris Agreement” in 2015. 
They agreed “to limit global warming to well below 2°C, preferably to 1.5°C, compared to pre-
industrial levels”.  
 
A rise of 1.5°C, or 2°C might not sound like a big deal. We might have recently planned a trip outdoors 
and checked the forecast again in the hope that it would have notched up a bit. In winter months, we 
have probably given the thermostat a little nudge for a bit of extra comfort. What’s the big deal? A 
rise of 2°C does not naturally trigger loud alarm bells in the public imagination. It would not be that 
surprising to think that the human impacts of climate change might be fixed with a bit more suntan 
cream.   
However, a raised temperature is a big deal. It is a systemic problem. Anyone who has had a fever for 
a few days at 39°C will know how lethargic and grumpy it can make them feel. Moreover, doctors 
 
7 Thanks to the clarity of mind of the climate scientist Ed Hawkins.  
8 The colours are rooted in the HadCRUT4 gridded dataset of global historical surface temperature anomalies relative to a 
1961-1990 reference period. Earlier data sets are available for each month, since January 1850, and can be found in the 
collaborative work of the Met Office Hadley Centre and the Climatic Research Unit at the University of East Anglia.  
9 Fudging the difference between the climate and the weather is a common tactic used by sceptics to undermine the 
climate science. It is also true that whilst extreme weather events are typical of what climate change looks like, some 
people engaged in climate activism can lack a bit of nuance by asserting a certain link between a weather event and a 
climate trend without qualification. 
 
