Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 49 
(BACK) 
 
This is the problem of entropy. This is the problem of an economy that is almost entirely linear – 
from extraction to manufacture, to use, to waste. It is a story that does not have a happy ending, 
because when all the useable gold is found and dug up, used and effectively lost… eventually, there 
will be none left.  
 
The example of gold is easy to think through, but the same is true for other elements. For example, 
there are two little tragedies happening when a child loses their grip on an helium balloon and it 
starts its vertiginous climb out of reach. The balloon and the happy Mickey Mouse face is lost 
forever, and so is the irreplaceable Helium inside it. Helium just goes straight through the 
atmosphere and into outer space. Likewise, when farmers use finite Phosphates and scatter them 
into the grooves of their deeply tilled fields, it is also effectively lost.  
 
It is in this fuller sense that a closed mass system has profound implications for life on Earth.  
 
Although Physicists will wince at this definition, the Second Law of Thermodynamics can be (very) 
roughly caricatured as “You use it, you lose it”. The universe has an arrow of time that only points 
forward, and this is underpinned by the fact that it is continually moving from a higher ordered state 
to a lower one. Even if you try to fight the tide and put things back into an ordered state, if you look 
over your shoulder, you will see that you have caused more chaos somewhere else in the process.  
 
 
Figure 8 -  T-shirt is available at "www.shirtoid.com" 
 
 
It will be left to the smiling face of Brian Cox in the YouTube video links at the end of the chapter to 
provide the fuller explanation, but the Physics actually just comes down to quite simple 
mathematical probability: If I was to throw a box of chalk into the air, there are simply billions of 
ways that they could all fly, land and roll. There is a possibility that they land and line up to form the 
words, “This is an existential crisis”. But that ordered state, of letters and meaning, is so much more 
unlikely than the chalk simply looking like a mess.  
 
There is an extremely restricted number of combinations for the final placement of the chalk for that 
phrase to present itself to us. There is a tiny bit of wriggle room for the odd stick of chalk to just roll 
a bit to the side yet leave the phrase legible. However, there are simply overwhelming numbers of 
possibilities in which this phrase does not appear. In fact there are an overwhelming number of 
possible results in which nothing at all distinct appears. And this basic game of probability plays out 
with every move that is made in the universe all the time. In the great big scheme of things, our 
universe is slowly, inexorably, moving from a more ordered state to a less ordered state.  
 
And there is no arguing with this, it underpins time itself. The universe will eventually run out of 
useable energy. But this is not something that anyone alive today needs to worry about – because 
