Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 296 
(BACK) 
 
b) The man: Plato  
Our guide for this city tour is Plato (b. 428BCE). A remarkable ancient 
Philosopher.   
In this famous bust, Plato appears to us as a mature and dignified man. 
He looks self-assured, statesmanlike and wise. Plato is a thinker with a 
reputation as solid as the rock onto which his face was carved. He 
certainly deserves the status that scholars accord to him as the Father of 
Western Philosophy. He was a giant thinker, whose sheer range and 
ambition of thought set the agenda for over two millennia – something 
that is agreed upon by both his admirers and his detractors. As A.N. 
Whitehead once commented: “The safest general characterisation of 
the European philosophical tradition is that it consists of a series of 
footnotes to Plato”.381 
Yet, despite his rock-hard face in the busts of Antiquity, there is a Plato behind that image who was a 
human being, wrestling with all of life’s difficulties and contradictions. Despite his reputation in the 
20th century for sanctioning tight-fisted totalitarian regimes,382 Plato was a wonderfully open and 
creative man.  
Behind the stony features of his bust, there is a Plato who was struggling to understand why humans 
can fail so ruinously. Contrary to the common view of Plato as a dogmatist, the man that sat in front 
of a blank sheet of papyrus to write his Philosophy was both playful and sensitive. He was someone 
looking beyond the booms and the busts of society, to the fundamental truth of things.   
Indeed, Plato was hit by some tough events in his youth. These hard episodes in his life have real 
poignancy for us today.  They are revealing of the significant parallels between our modern world 
and his ancient one. Plato’s face might look blank, but by getting beyond the surface of things, a 
resonance will emerge between us and him.  
c) The Warships 
We can meet Plato in the Piraeus. Plato would have been a frequent visitor to that harbour. He 
would likely have taken some casual walks by the sea, just for the fresh salty air; or perhaps he ‘went 
down’383 there for some shopping or to attend a festival. However, one of his visits there would have 
cut far more deeply into his memory.  
Plato was born into a time of war. Athens had been at war with Sparta since 431BCE, and the 
democracy had just voted to launch a major military offensive: ‘The Sicilian Expedition’. It was a 
massive naval attack, that set sail from the Piraeus in 415BCE.  
 
381 Process and Reality (Free Press, 1979, p. 39).  
382 Karl Popper, “The Open Society and Its Enemies” (1945) is a brilliant defence of democracy. Popper underlines the 
fundamental importance of openness and enquiry in a healthy civilisation with tenacity and intellectual authority. 
However, the consequence of his work was an unnecessarily myopic view of Plato. 
 
383 « Yesterday, I went down to the Piraeus” is the famous opening line of Plato’s ‘Republic’.  
