Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 107 
(BACK) 
 
people cut off from a modern economy. The opposite is true, they died precisely because they had 
recently been conscripted into it. Poverty in India is normally understood as a lack of modernization, 
but on closer inspection, this view is arguably upside down.    
At the level of the soil, the level of community, and at the level of commerce, the Indian economy 
had suffered a major loss of ‘biodiversity’. The rich tapestry of countless local connections and 
interests had been reduced to an almost singular algorithm that only valued profit margins, and 
which was designed and adjusted from distant desks in London.  This weakening of the economic 
and social fabric of India made it prone to the moods of the monsoons and the markets. In summary, 
the diverse Indian economy was transformed, from a complex Moghul carpet into a functional rope. 
Indeed, Moghul carpets are famous for their knot density, scenic landscapes, floral and animal 
patterns.  
The original Indian economy was of course, far from perfect, but the overall effect of British rule was 
to tie the Indian people (rather like a cash cow) by a rope to the Stock Exchange in Sweeting’s Alley, 
London.  
Davis summarises, “The great drought of 1876 to 1879 left an estimated 20-30 million dead169. The 
European empires, together with Japan and the United States, rapaciously exploited the opportunity 
to wrest new colonies, expropriate communal lands, tap novel sources of plantation and mine 
labour. What seemed from a metropolitan perspective as the 19th century’s final blaze of imperial 
glory was from an Asian or African perspective only the hideous light of a giant funeral pyre.”  
It is noteworthy that the East India Company established an early grip in the area which we now 
know as Bangladesh. Before the arrival of the British, the Bengal region was known as “The Paradise 
of the Nations” with some of the highest living standards and wages in the world.170 The area is also 
famous for the pivotal moment in the British takeover of India, namely, “The Battle of Plassey” 
(1757). After Clive of India’s troops sealed their victory the British installed puppet governments in 
all the different states. This kleptocracy impoverished the area, and as the tragic famines rolled in, 
the bloated bank balances of the British were soon matched by the bloated bellies of those suffering 
from kwashiorkor starvation. 
This liquidation of diversity and local wealth into cash flows hit the Bengalese with real material 
force. And as the previous section outlined, this process of ‘capitalization’ of land and people for the 
profits of distant owners really went through the gears in the 19th century. After land and people, it 
was the atmosphere that was colonized by the emissions of the industrialised nations in the 20th 
century, a type of kleptocracy that has accelerated with exponential speed since the 1950s. 
Yet despite their minimal emissions, there are not many countries more vulnerable to climate 
change dynamics than Bangladesh. In fact, there are only 6.171 It is ranked 7th in the Global Climate 
Risk Index (CRI) for extreme weather events. For example, based on data from 2000 to 2009, 
Bangladesh lost 11,450 people, suffered economic losses worth $3.72bn and witnessed 185 extreme 
 
169 Mike Lewis includes in this figure the other famines that were triggered by the El Niño oscillation that 
affected the climate across the globe. There were three major famines at this time, that affected the 
populations of China, north Eastern Brazil and that of India.  
170  M. Shahid Alam (2016). Poverty From The Wealth of Nations: Integration and Polarization in the 
Global Economy since 1760. Springer Science + Business Media. p. 32.  
171 The others are: 1) Puerto Rico 2) Myanmar 3) Haiti 4) Philippes 5) Mozambique 6) Bahamas.  
