Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 151 
(BACK) 
 
From that bench, we walked in opposite directions around the lake. A few minutes later found me 
sitting like a zombie in my car, and it took a few weeks to shake off a sense of the unreal.   
 
Under pressure 
We all carry around in our head a certain constellation of beliefs.  
We use this set of beliefs to interpret the events around us. This frame of understanding enables us 
to put things in perspective; it helps us explain why certain things have happened, and why others 
didn’t.  It also provides us with a map with which to move forward into the world.   
However, these belief and ways of life can come under pressure. All world views must cope with 
experiences that stretch their understanding of reality.  In unusual circumstances, sudden and 
unexpected shocks can be really confusing and painful to deal with. Accommodating such events 
into a belief system is a tough thing to do.   
A resilient background set of beliefs is normally a good thing. We all need a stable storyline to make 
sense of what is going on around us. A relationship is usually one of the biggest stars in our 
constellation of meaning. My belief that I had a happy and long future together with Kate was a 
major plotline in the story I was in; it gave shape to my future, either measured in years, weeks or 
days. I admit that I was embarrassingly slow to understand what Kate was trying to tell me. Not only 
had she affirmed our relationship in countless moments before, but the whole thing just made so 
much sense it really was difficult to understand what was happening at that bench.  
My bad. Yet, imagine the opposite psychological problem. It would be impossible to live with 
somebody who had an extremely fragile scaffolding of beliefs for his or her life. Imagine how 
implausible it would be to partner someone for whom one forgotten Valentine’s card, or one burp at 
the dinner table, would invalidate a whole relationship; or one phrase said in anger would be a 
definitive signal to walk out.  
Indeed, in love, it is the overcoming of glitches, the ability to see beyond a fault or a mistake that 
makes things work. It is the willingness to reconcile and repair that gives a relationship its deeper 
strength. The craft of mending is where some of the deepest stitches are made. The restoration of a 
common space between two people brings with it a stronger unity.  
More generally, life will often throw a whole lot of junk at all of us. It is healthy and important to 
have a framework to understand it all. Indeed, the resilience of our background beliefs about life is 
an essential feature of human societies. Either as individuals, or a culture, we need a sense of the 
narrative line that joins up the main dots of our experience.  
We are not just a 2-dimensional PacMan, mindlessly going “gobble, gobble, gobble” from one 
sensation to the next.  We all live inside a matrix of beliefs. We could call this matrix “the symbolic 
order”246 or more simply, our “story of the world”247. We can’t live without this framework, even if 
such a lot of it is invisible or subconscious.  
 
 
246 This is concept of the psychoanalyst, Jacques Lacan. It is a useful piece of vocabulary even without 
explaining or subscribing to the deeper meanings that he embedded in the term.  
247 A term from the public speaker and author, Charles Eisenstein.  
