Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 124 
(BACK) 
 
Human Development Index 
 
A quick scan of those figures makes it clear that there is a major difference between the reductions 
required from the ‘Global North’ and the ‘Global South’. In Human Geography these concepts depict 
rough zones of human development: the rich lie to the North, and the poor lie to the South (with a 
few major exceptions). The UN has a more specific system of categorization, the Human 
Development Index (HDI). This index groups nations into Very High Developed Nations (VHD), High 
Developed Nations (HD), Medium Developed Nations (MD) and Low Developed Nations (LD), based 
on a wide range of data, from life-expectancy (health) to schooling (education) to purchasing power 
(PPP) (wealth).201 The top 26 VHD are put into a category of their own, they  form the Ultra High 
Developed Nations (UHD), the 12% of the population that are the healthiest (they live on average 20 
years longer than the Low Developed), best educated (on average an University degree compared to 
slightly more than elementary education of the Low developed) and wealthiest (they earn on 
average $54,000 per year compared to LD $3,000 of the LD, and have accumulated 178 times more 
wealth per person.). 
 
The UHD 
 
It is immediately clear from the table that the highest emitters are the healthiest, wealthiest, and 
best educated nations on the planet. They set the example of ‘human development’ - a standard of 
living that all nations aspire to achieve. The UHD (makes up 12 % of the population, and yet they are 
responsible for 33 % of consumption emissions and for 51 % of historic or cumulative emissions (the 
cause of climate change).  
 
They are the ones with the prime responsibility for the situation we are all in, and they are the 
nations with the highest capacity to achieve the change required. Once the UHD nations take the 
lead, the other nations will find it much easier to follow. Therefore, in the full table to be found at 
www.CUTxpercent.org the nations are listed in this order.  
 
Within this group, there are some heavy hitters. The colossal states of Australia (-16%) Canada (-
16%) and the USA (-19%) and the diminutively sized Luxembourg (-40%) have the heaviest carbon 
footprints because of their highly consumptive lifestyles202. Of these big players, France (-7.1%) has a 
lower number because of its nuclear power capacity. By contrast HD Portugal (-6.1%) benefits from 
a Mediterranean climate, a well-developed green energy supply and a more modest level of 
consumption than most of its EU neighbours.  
Despite the general sense in public debates that the EU is a world leader in sustainability, the figures 
simply do not bear out this claim. It is important to note the gap between what each UHD nation has 
promised to do, and what it needs to do.  As noted previously, it is currently standard practice for 
the EU nations to state their pledges in the highly confusing format:   “cut ‘x’ % by date ‘y’ compared 
to date ‘z.’. In the CUTx Index, these commitments have been translated into the same metrics as all 
the other numbers so that the pledges can be seen in a clear light. So, in the case of Germany, for 
example, if their policy commitments are cashed out into measurable metrics of the index it can be 
seen that they have effectively only pledged to cut emissions by 4.6% per year from now. What they 
 
201 https://hdr.undp.org/en/home.  
202202 All the figures in this section will be quoted for 2°C, with the reductions starting now and with 83% 
probability. The complete set of numbers can be found at www.CUTxpercent.org. For ease of reference here, 
the reductions necessary for 1.5°C are: Australia (54%), Canada (52%), USA (62%), Luxembourg (overlimit), 
France (23%) and Portugal (20%).  
