Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 68 
(BACK) 
 
However, the data that matters shows very clearly that we are not making any inroads into curtailing 
our reliance on fossil fuel. The word “transition” for the energy sector is dangerous misnomer. The 
whole energy industry is stuck in stasis.99,100 
In fact, all of the recent policy commitments to new investments in green energy are not even 
sufficient to deal with the increased demand for energy that will come in the years ahead from factors 
such as consumption and population growth.  
Therefore, in the absence of commitments that are rooted in the reality of the remaining carbon 
budget, fossil fuel use and emissions will continue to increase until 2030 and beyond.101,102,103 This 
decisive move away from fossil fuels must also be accompanied by a more modest culture of 
consumption too. It is tempting to say that it must also be characterized by a reduction of human 
population, but this is complex of course. The fact is that the territories of the world that consume 
way beyond the average have flat or declining populations, and their historic emissions have made 
the traditional pathway to economic growth through the dense power of fossil fuels impossible for 
these developing nations.   
Infrastructure not Individuals   
As stated in the introduction to this book, individual actions about their choices in consumption are 
valuable. Any new global situation that features a dramatic drop in our emissions will necessarily be 
characterized by much more modest markets and by clever circular consumption. There is no way 
around this. All of our efforts to reduce our carbon footprint have to be sustained.  
But what has decades of the fight for climate justice achieved with individual actions as the 
dominant narrative? The answer is vividly clear in the dots of the Keeling Curve. 
The plank in our eye is our systemic dependency on fossil fuel, and this can only be flipped by the 
leverage that available with legislation. We have to be blunt with ourselves. There is so much more 
to be won with a transfer of energy and focus. When Martin Luther King was fighting for equality 
and justice he was stubbornly focused on legislative change. He was intolerant of any gesture from 
the US government that did not grant fundamental rights at a system level. He was right to keep his 
eye on that prize. He would have never celebrated comfy seats in the black area of a café or a bus.  
The real action in any society takes place at a legislative level. It is the matrix that governs 
everything. The framework of laws, both national and international, guide investments, 
infrastructure, in short, everything.  
The markets know this, and the fossil fuel industry knows it.  
It is not by chance that in the first three years following the Paris Agreement in 2015 the five largest 
publicly-traded oil and gas companies (ExxonMobil, Royal Dutch Shell, Chevron, BP and Total) 
invested over $1bn in what is known as “narrative capture”.104 One of their central methods of 
 
99 T.C.J.Dangerman & A. Grossler, “No way out? - Analysing policy options to alleviate or derail Success-to-the-Successful in the energy 
system”. (2013) https://hdl.handle.net/2066/91359 
100 Wainstein, M; Dangerman, J; Dangerman, S, Energy business transformation & Earth system resilience: A metabolic approach, Journal 
of Cleaner Production, 2019, 215 pp. 854 - 869 
101 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) Updated synthesis report on the aggregate effect of the Intended 
Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs) May 2016. 
102 PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency, Climate Pledge NDC Tool, Global emissions, http://themasites.pbl.nl/climate-ndc-
policies-tool. 
103 United Nations Emissions Gap Report, 2019, figure ES4. 
104 www.influencemap.org is a valuable organisation that exposes the details of those investments.  
