Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 218 
(BACK) 
 
Reflection Number Ten 
On Having Heretical Thoughts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We all find it a bit bemusing to look at bumptious blokes from the past. Their sense of fashion just 
seems far out - their pompous clothes, horrendous hair and pretentious poses.  
 
Here is a good example. King George III of England.   
 
Like all royal portraits, this one has framed him with all the plump and luxuriant comforts that his 
enormous wealth and power provide. There is a serious amount of 18th century bling on show here. 
These status symbols do not have much resonance with us. It just all looks a bit fluffy.  
 
It is therefore a bit weird to think that in the months leading up to the American War of 
Independence, there was a really difficult psychological battle going on in the minds of the colonists. 
Cutting the umbilical cord on the motherland, Britain, was not just a simple act of surgery. There 
were all kinds of deep psychological issues involved in such a severance from the ties of history and 
culture. This conflicted mindset can be seen all over the historical documents of the time.   
 
They were torn. On the one hand, they were aware that in exchange for paying a lot of taxes they 
were not getting a lot back in return from London. They were not even getting a vote. On the other 
hand, King George was the figure head of a whole empire of meaning, or what we might now call ‘a 
symbolic order’. It would just be too weird, unthinkable even, to dismantle such a deeply established 
set of norms - a kind of patricide.  
 
The USA today is such a big global fact, it is hard to imagine how stressful this separation from the 
United Kingdom was.  
 
Especially when we look at King George III. What? You say. That guy, with that wig? How could he 
hold such a symbolic hold over the imaginations of so many independent minded people?  
 
Yet somewhere, we all instinctively hold a basic faith in government. Deep down, somewhere close 
to that innate trust that children have in their parents (no matter what they are actually like), we 
have a fundamental confidence that a government is on our side. In fact, the bigger the problem, the 
more unthinkable it would be that they are not dealing with it. How could advanced, technological 
societies, with open and democratic governments allow something so utterly catastrophic to 
happen?  
 
