Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 143 
(BACK) 
 
Our understanding of chaotic change, rather appropriately, suddenly jumped forward by accident in 
1961.  
On a cold winters’ day in January of that year, Edward 
Lorenz, a leading mathematician and meteorologist, was 
sat at his work in MIT. Given his interest in these two 
fields, and his position at a leading university, it is not 
surprising to note that he could be found feeding 12 
weather data sets into his LGP-30 (one of the earliest 
digital computers made by Royal Bee). Lorenz was 
working on advanced dynamic modelling systems to 
predict the weather.  
 
He then went for a coffee, whilst the computer chewed 
over the numbers.  
Whilst he was away from his desk a major moment in 20th century science happened234.  
Upon returning to his desk, an hour later, he saw that the LGP-30 had produced weather predictions 
that were seriously odd. The 2 months of modelling time inside the computer’s head had finished with 
predictions of temperatures and rainfall patterns never seen on the planet before. It was not a 
technical failure, nor a failure of the underlying mathematical models. The uncomfortable truth was 
that Lorenz had simply made one tiny change in the data – at the fourth decimal place. Instead of 
inputting the figures to 6 decimal places and typing in “0.506127”, he had rounded it down to “0.506”. 
It demonstrated that tiny changes could result in the whole system jumping into a radically different 
state.  
It was a shock to see that the climate system was perhaps not the stable, self-regulating world that 
people imagined. The sheer number of interconnecting cogs in the atmosphere and biosphere, cogs 
both massive and (pertinently here) miniscule, meant that such unpredictable results were possible.  
It would come to be known as “The Butterfly Effect”, after the title of Lorenz’s lecture, “Does the flap 
of a butterfly’s wings in Brazil set off a tornado in Texas? 235 This new understanding of the underbelly 
of reality would have a formative impact a huge range of studies, from Physics,  Biology and 
Sociology.236 237 Just because a system obeys certain laws, it does not mean that the outcome of an 
action can be predicted. This reality of this kind of change, chaotic change, does not mean that 
everything which happens in a system occurs by chance; the governing laws of physics and chemistry 
remain in operation, as do the laws of cause and effect. It is simply that small changes in dynamic 
systems can lead to drastic changes in results.  
 
234 E. N. Lorenz, The Essence of Chaos, U. Washington Press, Seattle (1993), page 134 
235 Professor Lorenz lecture in MIT, December 1972, at the American Association for the Advancement of 
Science, 139th Meeting.  
236 Emmanuel Kerry commented, “By showing that certain deterministic systems have formal predictability 
limits, Ed[ward] put the last nail in the coffin of the Cartesian universe and fomented what some have called the 
third scientific revolution of the 20th century, following on the heels of relativity and quantum physics”.  
237 It even turned out to have some very practical applications too – such as the analysis of football crowd 
movements in a stadium R.H. Leverone, “Crowds as complex adaptive systems: Strategic implications for law 
enforcement” (2016).  
Figure 22, LGP-30 computer at the Computer History 
Museum, Marcin Wichary from San Francisco, CC BY 
2.0 
