Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 155 
(BACK) 
 
What should count as an alarm signal for emotional, physical or sexual abuse is most often 
converted or suppressed by the victim to not count.  
Like a blackhole, which grows in size and its pulling power with every star it swallows up, this kind of 
warping of our personal reality is truly difficult to move decisively out of. In dysfunctional 
relationships, the centre of gravity is too heavy and too strong to enable the person trapped in that 
space to act autonomously. All the lines of meaning involved in that relationship tend to bend in 
towards the problem, and it takes real courage and outside help to get up, over and out of it.   
Indeed, even without the damage that might be inflicted by someone else, we can get into negative 
feedback loops of meaning on our own. In periods of doubt, isolation or depression, it can be hard to 
allow the clear voice of love or praise a place in the orbits of our thoughts. Every gesture or action, 
“I Love The Way You Lie”                                                                          
 
 
Eminem  
“Now I know we said things, did things that we didn't mean 
Then we fall back into the same patterns 
Same routine, but your temper's just as bad as mine is 
You're the same as me, when it comes to love, you're just as blinded 
All I know is I love you too much to walk away though 
Come inside, pick up your bags off the sidewalk 
Don't you hear sincerity in my voice when I talk? 
Told you this is my fault, look me in the eyeball 
Next time I'm pissed, I'll aim my fist at the drywall 
Next time? There won't be no next time 
I apologize, even though I know it's lies 
I'm tired of the games, I just want her back, I know I'm a liar 
If she ever tries to fucking leave again 
I'm a tie her to the bed and set this house on fire 
Rhianna:  
“Just gonna stand there and watch me burn? 
Well, that's alright, because I like the way it hurts 
Just gonna stand there and hear me cry? 
Well, that's alright, because I love the way you lie 
I love the way you lie 
I love the way you lie”.  
