Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 327 
(BACK) 
 
examples of supposedly enlightened leaders who have justified their abusive and destructive 
regimes by pointing to the fact that ‘they know best’.  
Some might want to play a dictatorship dot to dot from Plato to people like Robespierre, Lenin, 
Stalin and Mao.415  
A visit to the KGB Museum in Vilnius, Lithuania offers a vivid 
illustration of these fears. The torture room pictured left, is 
where thousands of dissidents, detractors, or anyone 
considered a threat to the state, were interrogated by those 
in power. If the prisoner could not be persuaded to see the 
deeper values and purpose of the Soviet state, if they could 
not be re-educated to appreciate the higher truths of 
Stalinist history – they would be deleted from that history, 
for the greater good.  
And tellingly, in the room right next door to the torture 
chamber, there was a very comfortable reading room for the 
KGB officers to relax in.  
This abysmal juxtaposition of terror and ‘truth’ is not unique 
to a Lithuanian prison. Indeed, many people have pointed an 
accusing finger at Plato for all the moments in human history 
where despots, and all their offices of power, have inflicted 
suffering on their people in the name of a higher truth and 
reality.  
A full defence of Plato, from this accusation, can be found in “Plato Tackles Climate Change” (2021). 
The essential qualities and value of Plato’s educational project will follow in the rest of this chapter.  
For now, one simple fact can be underlined: 
The Academic space that Plato set up was a school of Philosophy. This word literally means, a love of 
wisdom (φιλο (philo, love); σοφός (sophos, wisdom). It was a place of dialogue; of open handed, 
creative enquiry. The students in Plato’s Academy had a commitment to truth and justice, they were 
motivated to overcome the self in the service of what was good.  
It is not Plato’s fault that later societies hijacked his project. Anyone who wants to malign Philosophy 
and accuse it of twisting truth and reality to some kind of selfish agenda has not understood the 
meaning of the word.  
Read the label!  
The Academic project that Plato set up, as defined by the word Philosophy itself, was dedicated to 
establishing the deepest well-being of an individual life, and society. Indeed, Academia was a school 
in which property was banned. The students were forbidden from any type of ownership. A law 
which illuminates the genuine ambition of the school.  
It is always important to read the label.  
 
415 Karl Popper (1902-1994) articulates the details of this dictatorship dot to dot in his two volume work, “The 
Open Society and Its Enemies” (1945).  
Figure 57, Former building of KGB, Vilnius, 
Lithuania, November 2007. Source, "Mental", 
Mart Wegman, cc-by-2.0. 
