Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 171 
(BACK) 
 
audience of 2000-4000 people.  This act was made possible by the slack responses of the local 
Sherriff.264    
The systemic, background abuse against black people 
had been punctuated 3,446 times by such grotesque 
lynchings265. They functioned like symbolic rites, 
where all the mad disgust and grievances of a 
community were unleashed. A 1930s editorial in the 
Raleigh News and Observer noted, “Whole families 
came together, mothers and fathers, bringing even 
their youngest children. It was the show of the 
countryside – a very popular show. Men joked loudly 
at the sight of the bleeding body … girls giggled as the 
flies fed on the blood that dripped from the Negro’s 
nose.” 
After celebratory picnics at the scene, charred body 
parts would often be taken home as trophies, 
souvenirs, or relics, depending on the macabre 
psychology of the attendees. The arresting song, “Strange Fruit”, sung with formidable power by 
Billy Holiday and Nina Simone, is a song that captures the savage ugliness of these lynchings with a 
haunting directness and strength.    
The depth of the peaceful transformation 
achieved by the Civil Rights Movement, can only 
be properly appreciated when these marks of 
trauma have been noted on the social body of 
America. Rosa Parks sat on the bus in a society 
that was institutionally, viscerally, formidably 
racist. It is easy to forget how improbable 
systemic change must have seemed in 1950s 
USA. 
Indeed, the whiff of this “Strange Fruit” was 
particularly pungent in 1955.  
In a town called Money (Mississippi) a young 
boy, of only 14 years old, had been lynched. His 
name was Emmett Till. What was Rosa Parks 
thinking of when she refused to move from her 
seat on that bus?  
 
 
264 Lawrence O. Christensen (1999). "Gunn, Raymond". Dictionary of Missouri Biography. University of Missouri 
Press. pp. 359–360 
265 http://archive.tuskegee.edu/repository/digital-collection/lynching-information/ In total 4,743 were lynched 
(3,446 African Americans, 1297 whites) between 1886 and 1962.  
“Strange Fruit”  
“Southern trees bear a strange fruit 
Blood on the leaves and blood at the root 
Black bodies swingin' in the Southern breeze 
Strange fruit hangin' from the poplar trees 
Pastoral scene of the gallant South 
The bulgin' eyes and the twisted mouth 
Scent of magnolias sweet and fresh 
Then the sudden smell of burnin' flesh 
Here is a fruit for the crows to pluck 
For the rain to gather 
For the wind to suck 
For the sun to rot 
For the tree to drop 
Here is a strange and bitter crop 
Figure 28, Lynchings by states and counties in the 
United States, 1900-1931 : (data from Research 
Department, Tuskegee Institute)  
American Map Company (New York, N.Y.) 
