Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 197 
(BACK) 
 
Reflection Number Two 
The future does not have to match the past. 
 
A Turkey called Tim has understood something. 
When he hears the clang of the gate, the ring of a bell, and then the shaking of the seed in a bucket, 
he knows that it is dinner time.  
 
He is right to be confident. This sequence of events has happened every day for months.  
 
Clang. Ring. Shake.  
Gobble, gobble, gobble.  
 
Tim’s confidence in his theory has grown with each passing day.  
The flesh around Tim’s bones has also grown.  
 
It is now  23rd December . Tim has no reason to doubt that there is anything wrong with his theory.  
He hears the clang, the ring, the shake.  
 
But the gobble, gobble, gobble happens much later than normal.  
And it is the farmer, not Tim, that is making the noise.   
 
Human beings have enjoyed the wonderfully benign years of the Holocene for thousands of years.  
It would seem a bit loopy to think that things could get radically different in the near future.  
 
But the future does not have to match the past.  
 
 
Reflection Number Three 
How we got into a heap of trouble 
Motion Blindness 
In October 1978, a 43-year-old female patient was admitted to hospital in Munich. She was suffering 
from a lesion in section V5 of her brain. Patient ‘LM’ complained of extreme headaches and vertigo, 
but more puzzlingly, she could now only see the world in snapshot images. Her disorder is known to 
medical history now as Gross Akinetopsia. It is more commonly known as ‘Motion Blindness’. 
Patients suffering from Akinetopsia, with their strobe-like vision, find it very challenging to pour a 
glass of water and cross a road. They have also reported difficulties in following a conversation as 
the fluent soundtrack does not match the stuttering images of the lips that they see. LM is the only 
extensively documented case of severe Motion Blindness. 
For the rest of the human population who see reality as a smooth flow of events, this disorder is 
almost impossible to imagine. We normally need the help of a sci-fi movie or a modern art gallery to 
jolt our brains into such an alternative gear. 
