Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 333 
(BACK) 
 
 
When Plato went digging into the deeper fabric of the universe, he did not expect to just find rubble.  
He expected to find order and balance. He expected to find coherence and harmony.  He expected 
to see patterns and symmetries. The inscription about Geometry makes these expectations explicit.  
Indeed, at the zero level of the universe we can find Maths.418  
This world of Mathematics is not just a blizzard of numbers. This fundamental dimension to the 
universe is orderly, and Geometry is the first level at which those truths start to take shape. In 
Geometry, statistical dots embody themselves into lines, angles, circles, cones and cylinders. It is all 
abstract, but we can grasp these truths in our mind, or on paper, as meaningful structures.  
We can nudge things further in that direction (from the conceptual to the material), simply by 
looking at our environment. Plato would not have been surprised to find how much the natural 
world is informed by mathematical concepts and rules.419 For example, bees construct their golden 
bee hives in hexagons. Pinecones and pineapples grow along lines marked out by the golden ratio of 
φ (phi). A congregation of bubbles are moved to form hexagons, and the spiral arms of our galaxy 
are reaching out in praise of the Fibonacci sequence.  
From the delicate artistry of a spider’s web to the brutal force of a hurricane, nature is observant at 
so many levels to the rules and harmony of Maths.  
 
 
418 There are two ways to think about this. Either, by imagining the universe as a giant Simulation – a thought 
easily understood by watching the Matrix or reading some of Nick Bostrom’s books of Philosophy. Or, by 
having a long conversation with a theoretical Physicist about the Quantum world. In the end, normal language 
breaks down, and the only way to understand the basic operating system of the universe is with mathematical 
concepts. These two pathways are rooted in the same basic Pythagorean insight that the universe is basically 
numeric.  
 
419 Pythagoras (b. 570BCE), also founded a school (in Croton, Southern Italy). He called his school, “The 
Semicircle” (although he is now more famous for his theorem of triangles!). A few decades before Plato, He 
put forward the idea that the universe was essentially, at its most fundamental, simply numbers. It was an idea 
that was resonant with Plato, who was informed of Pythagoras’ work. What lies beneath the scruffy surface of 
things is a mathematical reality, the key co-ordinates of which both Plato and Pythagoras had started to map 
out.  As the philosopher Aristotle noted in his Metaphysics, “The so-called Pythagoreans applied themselves to 
mathematics, and were the first to develop this science; and through studying it they came to believe that its 
principles are the principles of everything.” (985b) 
