Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 323 
(BACK) 
 
A bridge to Chapter 16 
From the Piraeus to Academia 
It is time to look forward, towards the exit. We all teach our children History, but we do not yet 
teach them Future.  
However, Education can be so transformative.  
The mind, the educated mind, is truly powerful.  
It can find deep new syntheses, or it can work as a radical circuit breaker. 
We can take up high vantage points, we can get beyond just a street level view.  
We might be sensory animals, but we are also rational ones. We might be easily led by our desires, 
but we are also deeper than that. Far deeper than that.  
All the previous chapters have provided a view of the main pillars of the crisis. From the Absolute 
Basics of the problem concerning the heating effect of CO2, to the fact that Planet Earth is a Closed 
Mass System - best understood as a Spaceship with limited resources. From the details of exactly 
how near we are to various tipping points, to some of the key psychological and social reasons as 
why, weirdly, we have not yet responded to that catastrophic threat.  
After all the details of these component parts of the system, this chapter has provided a brief 
moment to look at the mechanics of the system itself.  
In the next chapter, we will step away from the Piraeus and go up into 
the northwestern suburb of Athens. This suburban area, high up in the 
hills overlooking the town, is called Academia. It is the place where Plato 
himself went, after a long reflection on the state of Athens that failed so 
tragically in his youth. 
The reason the name Academia is familiar to us, is because this is the 
place that Plato founded the world’s first university. It is informative to 
note that the word education comes from the Latin, ‘ducere’ which 
means to ‘lead’ or to ‘guide’. So education literally means to “lead out”. 
Lead out of false assumptions, illusions, clichés…   
It is from Academia, that this book will take in one final panoramic view 
of the climate crisis. This is the Climate Academy student book after all.  
In contrast to this chapter, the last chapter, will be about the solutions.  
It will be about three elevated, noble things:   
d) Education 
ii)  Just laws 
iii)   Virtues 
Three things that can act as circuit breakers.  
Three things that can be regenerative. 
 
 
