Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 285 
(BACK) 
 
the laws and culture that the characters find themselves struggling with are also not permanent or 
necessary. Therefore, they too can be dismantled and reconstructed. 
Kafka brings an unflinching directness about the difficulties that confront us when we come up 
against systems of power that make it seemingly impossible to be heard or understood. Kafka 
presents us with a focus on people who still strive to find traction in the world, even though their 
actions are consistently dissonant with how everyone else seems to think.  
Seen from just a small change of angle, Arendt provides us with a hero in the figure of K.  
She writes, “For the villagers K.’s strangeness consists not of his being deprived of the essentials of 
life but of his asking for them. K.’s stubborn singleness of purpose, however, opens the eyes of some 
of the villagers; his behaviour teaches them that human rights may be worth fighting for, that the 
rule of the Castle is not divine law and, consequently, it can be attacked”.    
These are important points for those engaged in the struggle for systemic climate justice.  
 
 
a) On the importance of humour and irony  
 
Figure 51, Homer Simpson, on the lighter side of grief. Screenshot, YouTube. 
 
Kafka once wrote to his lover Felice Bauer, "I can laugh, Felice, don't doubt that. I'm even known for 
my propensity to laugh." 
Indeed, Max Brod, a close friend of Kafka, recounted how Kafka found humour in his dark works. In 
the case of the chilling narrative of "The Trial", Brod asserted that Kafka thought it was “a hoot”. 
Apparently, Kafka laughed so hard while reading the first chapter aloud, that he repeatedly had to 
stop to collect himself. 
The funny side of Kafka is not obvious to see. But Hans-Gerd Koch, a Kafka scholar, notes, "It's 
terribly funny in a very direct way." "Gregor Samsa turns into a beetle who crawls along the wall and 
tries to work out how he should pack his suitcase." And David Foster Wallace, in his “Laughing With 
Kafka” (1988) notes the arid dry wit of Kafka, through his "tight, cool, detached, sparse, logically 
constructed language."  
 
