Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 311 
(BACK) 
 
If you don’t go beyond this short summary of the Allegory, if you don’t read the original text in the 
Republic, there is a very quick way to understand what Plato is getting at – with this notion of a 
deeper, “more real” level of reality.  
Just draw a freehand circle on a piece of paper, then ask someone what they can see.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As long as you are not completely hopeless at drawing circles, they will be able to identify, the “form 
of circle” in what you have sketched. Your circle isn’t perfect. It isn’t geometrically a circle. Yet, even 
though the sensory input to the eyes is imperfect, the mind of the observer is able to connect it to 
something that they know: the “Form of Circle”.  
The perfect, ideal, circle. Understood by the mind, not grabbed by the senses.  
Why talk about all this abstract stuff? Why try to look beyond the surface of things?  
Why split the world in two? Why try to lock onto something beyond the senses?  
Science  
Ultimately, Plato set his mind and heart to reach out for the permanent features of the universe. He 
was trying to capture the essence, or underlying unity of things.400 This was not a new project for the 
ancient Greeks. Thales (b. 626/623BCE) had proposed that the universe was fundamentally 
comprised of water. Anaximenes (b. 586BCE) proposed that the first principle of all things was air. 
And Pythagoras401 (b. 570BCE), (although he is now more famous for his equation about triangles) 
put forward the remarkably durable idea that the universe was essentially numbers.  
In opposition to these thinkers were the Atomists, such as Leucippus and Democritus. They 
dismissed the idea that there was anything essential at all. They rejected any notion of a basic 
principle or ‘origin’. As their title suggests, they argued the universe was simply made up of various 
indivisible atoms and a void.  
Whatever the truth of these different attempts to grasp the most basic principle of the universe, 
what these pioneering thinkers did was to open up Western culture to remarkable new depths. The 
mind stretching abstractions of Plato, and all the other probing philosophers of ancient Greece, 
prompted us to look beyond the surface appearance of things.  
They put in place the basic conceptual framework of modern science. Behind all the movement of 
the planets and pears, atoms and apples, there is the reality of Newtonian Physics. Behind the 
 
400 The technical word in the ancient Greek word for this essence of things was “arche” – which roughly  
401 Not an ancient ancestor of mine.  
triggers 
A circle.  
Visible to 
the senses 
A circle.  
Clear to the 
intelligence 
