Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 26 
(BACK) 
 
inform us that if an elevated temperature is not treated for several weeks, then vital organs can start 
to break down. In fact, a 4°C rise for humans is a medical emergency; vital organ damage occurs, and 
death will follow if the temperature is not lowered quickly. It is called hyperpyrexia.  
All life has similar difficulties with movements in temperature outside of their tolerance zone. The 
parallel between ecological systems and the human body is only a metaphor, given that different 
organisms experience heat stress differently. However, it gives a good approximation of the deadly 
consequences that await human civilisation. Shockingly, we are on track to lock-in such dangerous 
high temperature rises by the end of this century, if not well before. It is crucial to not 
underestimate the systemic dangers of escalating levels of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.  
In 2019, global average temperature was 1.2°C higher than the pre-industrial level. Since 1980, each 
decade has been warmer than any preceding one since 1850.10 The seven warmest years on record 
have all been in the past seven years11. To illustrate this trend, Furnace Creek in Death Valley (USA) 
set a new record when it recorded a temperature of 54.4°C in 2020 12 (and again in 2021) 11. 
Temperatures so hot, the chickens in Inyo County (CA) were actually laying hard-boiled eggs for over 
a week13.    
Almost all the media attention on climate change is zoomed in on particular events – most typically, 
floods, storms or forest fires. These events are profoundly tragic for those who get caught up in 
them and deeply affecting for those who observe them from a distance. Of course, it is entirely 
appropriate to report on them and highlight the suffering and issues involved. However, when the 
media only covers climate change like this it misses the fundamental problem of the global heating 
that is speeding up: its systemic impact. 
The heatwaves, droughts, floods and storms are the most vivid signals of the increasing stress. These 
events hit our senses with force. They illustrate the gap between the ambitions of human civilisation 
and the pathway that the natural world is on. The dots of natural disasters that put increasingly large 
blots onto the record books of meteorologists and insurance companies are important moments in 
the dot-to-dot of climate change.  
However, a wider zoom is needed to really have a clear view of the dangers ahead. This wider zoom 
requires us to think in more abstract terms, it needs the work of science. It needs the long reach of 
scientific research. This extra level of abstraction and reasoning is why it gets less media attention, 
but this view of the biggest cogs of the Earth’s systems are where the critical action is actually taking 
place.  From the vantage point of climate science, there are things which the scientists can see that 
sometimes keep them awake at night (and this is not simply a metaphor).  
Climate science is attentive to some huge interlocking cogs that are in place around the planet that 
define how the whole of life works. If any one of these cogs is disturbed the consequences will play 
out in radically chaotic ways. These cogs define the grammar, not just the vocabulary of life. They 
are the fundamental principles, not the details.  
For example, we have permanent ice at both poles, these in turn fix the configuration of the Polar 
Front. The Polar Front jet stream is one of the major ribbons of very strong winds (up to 200kmh) 
 
10 World Meteorological Organization: Statement on the state of the global climate in 2019.  
11 World Meteorological Organization: State of Global Climate 2021, provisional report 
12 National Ocean and Atmospheric Administration: State of the Climate (August 2020)). 
13Just testing that you are paying attention. There is (of course) nothing scientific about this claim, it is just a 
lame joke.   
