Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 27 
(BACK) 
 
that flow around the globe in entrenched patterns, hundreds of kilometres wide. A destabilisation of 
this monumentally large pattern of energy transfer would be catastrophic.  
Let’s be honest, any consideration of the forces that dwarf our humanoid perspective of things is 
difficult – both psychologically and emotionally. It is probably one reason why Education, like the 
media, has been shy and reluctant to handle it. It is material that is not appropriate to teach to 
younger children. But can we honestly consider ourselves well educated if we did not know that the 
real damage caused by rising temperatures has the potential to cause the collapse of human 
civilization? If students attending university were not really aware of who Adolf Hitler was or if they 
did not really know what Google is, there would be serious questions to ask about their basic 
awareness of the world. Yet, how many university students have a clear understanding of the depth 
and severity of the climate crisis? How many would be able to explain why climate change is so 
much more of a threat to human life than the issues arising from plastic waste?   
There are lots of ways to express the serious negligence of our current educational standards. Is it 
like forgetting to mention on your Tinder profile that you are actually a vampire. It is like loosening 
the wheel bolts of your high-spec Porsche before driving for a blast down the A7 Autobahn. Or, 
perhaps most appropriately, if you are still in primary school (and not able to read this yet), it is like 
you are being very careful to not knock over a glass of your favourite juice at the family dinner table, 
whilst some mad uncle is sawing away at the table leg.  
The consideration of these interlinking big cogs of our planet deserves its own space in a later 
module, “Chapter 8: Tipping Points - Physical.”  But for the moment, it is simply enough to state that 
temperature, even if it is a seemingly small adjustment of 2°C, is a really big deal.  
 
 
2. Greenhouse Gases  
The extra heat energy that we have to cope with comes from the escalating concentrations of 
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. Science has known of the greenhouse gas effect since 1824, 
through the work of French physicist Joseph Fourier. In 1856, Eunice Foote provided the first key 
chemical details of this effect when she established that H2O and CO2 trap heat.14 
Modern science can measure, in a remarkably precise manner, which particles make up the 
atmosphere above our heads. As noted above, the Mauna Loa Observatory in Hawaii has been 
measuring the concentration of atmospheric molecules, expressed as parts per million (ppm). This 
data has been plotted onto a graph known as ‘The Keeling Curve’, so named after the scientist Charles 
David Keeling, who set it up. The Mauna Loa reading at the time of writing (March 2022) signalled that 
there were 420 particles of CO2 in every million (420 ppm).15 Nitrogen (N) makes up over three-
quarters of the rest with 780,900ppm, alongside Oxygen (O) that occupies 209,500 ppm. 
 
14 Foote E., “Circumstances affecting the Heat of the Sun’s Rays”. Read before the American Association, August 23d, 1856. 
It is common to credit John Tyndall for this discovery, but his lecture to the Royal Society lecture was delivered  three years 
later on June 10th, 1859.  
15 Source: https://www.esrl.noaa.gov/gmd/ccgg/trends/monthly.html 
