Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 342 
(BACK) 
 
Geometry puts shapes to numbers. It brings to the surface with great clarity how a bunch of 
statistics line up.  
We absolutely need to be bothered about how everything measures up to the defining planetary 
boundaries. We cannot be casual about how everything adds up. Getting clarity about the true 
proportions of things, beyond just a sketchy sense of it, is vital.  
If education were to be true to its Academic roots, it would be very concerned about the underlying 
shape of everything. The 360° vantage point of Plato’s Academy was not simply put in place so that 
his students would have a view of everything, it was also there because such a vantage point 
enabled them to see the relative importance of things.  
 
4. The need to see how everything is connected  
Following on from the previous two sections. 
We cannot just applaud the increasing number of battery cars without looking at the overall energy 
cost, and the impact that they have on resource extractions (and thereby biodiversity).  
Likewise, we cannot applaud a financial compensation scheme offered by the Global North to the 
Global South without analysing how much of the deal is simply a way to distract attention away from 
the deeper, longer costs and damages that the richer nations of the world are imposing on the poor 
by not dealing with their emissions.  
 
 
5. The ability to navigate between the universal and the particular (CUTx)  
Another happy consequence of developing a systems perspective is that this empowers students to 
move with assuredness between detail and the big picture. It is a crucial skill in academia, and in life 
in general, to be able to navigate between the universal and the particular.  
Identifying key details that illuminate everything else is an important competence.  
In the case of the Climate Academy, this is made easy with the deployment of the CUTx index.  
The index was built by scientists who have a full understanding of all the data banks, research papers 
and scientific conclusions – and who then condensed all that information into the simplest and most 
pointed numbers. In all the publications and events that are undertaken by the Climate Academy 
students, these numbers must be mobilized. This index protects them from making disproportionate 
claims or accusations, and it provides an authoritative set of statistics for the students to land their 
arguments with power.  
 
6. Genuine autonomy. Genuine love of truth and reality.   
 
It is important to remember that Athens was a slave society. Athenian military strength made it 
possible for those engaged in the Academy programme of learning to practice free thought. Those in 
the Academy had no material concerns to distract or pollute their thinking. They had no jobs to 
