Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 312 
(BACK) 
 
appearance of any object there is the hidden order of chemical elements, each with its own 
subatomic scaffolding. Behind all the vast array of flora and fauna, there are Darwinian principles of 
Natural Selection.  
In the worlds of Physics, Chemistry and Biology we are now very aware of governing, abstract 
principles. The same is true for innumerable fields, from the Economy (Smith) to Genetics (Mendel). 
Unseen, but real.  
Still, why talk about such things now? Why try to get beyond the street level view to fundamental 
principles? Why try to get from the Piraeus to a higher vantage point?  
The answer is that the climate crisis, can be best understood inside a deep, complex system 
framework. What we are experiencing at the surface level, is rooted in a profound dynamic. And just 
like scientists such as Newton and Darwin were able to discern the fundamental dynamics of the 
physical and biological world, so today there are complex systems scientists who are able to describe 
the forces at work in our own local and global situation.  
Sounds weird? What abstract forces are in play? What deeper powers are at work?  
Is it not all too varied and messy to pick out any fundamental driving force?  
There is a rapidly developing field of scientific research that would argue that it is possible to capture 
some primary, underpinning dynamics.  
The Science of Complex Systems 
There is a thing called, “Complex Systems Science”.   
The world’s leading work in this field is hosted in the Santa Fe Institute, an extraordinarily innovative 
and deeply exploratory research centre. Since its foundation in 1984, it has pulled together the most 
formidable minds on the planet to understand and unify “the underlying shared patterns in complex 
physical, biological, social, cultural, technological and even possible astrobiological worlds. As we 
reveal the unseen mechanisms and processes that shape these evolving worlds, we seek to use this 
understanding to promote the well-being of humankind and of life on earth.”402 
Nobel Laureate (Physics) Murray Gell-Mann co-founded the Institute, and it has since attracted the 
most eminent natural and social scientists to understand the fundamental patterns that govern 
complex systems. It is informative to read a line from a memo written by Cormac McCarthy, about 
the Institute’s operating principles, “We are absolutely relentless in hammering down the 
boundaries created by academic disciplines and institutional structures. If you know more than 
anyone else about a subject, we want to hear from you… It doesn’t matter what the subject is.” 
It is a relatively new field of research which has the umbrella term, “Complex System Theory”. It 
started with the groundbreaking work of CS Holling in 1973. His study of Spruce Forest Budworms 
noticed that the ecological system seemed to have a built-in resilience when it was hit by external 
disturbances.403 Now, it encompasses anthills to the anatomy of apes, the lithosphere to the 
cryosphere and all the human social systems that depend on them. It pulls together the social 
 
402 About | Santa Fe Institute 
403 Holling, C. S. 1973. Resilience and stability of ecological systems. Annual Review of Ecology and 
Systematics 4: 1-23. 
