Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 189 
(BACK) 
 
also put together and fought the Brown vs Board of Education of Topeka in 1954 (successfully argued 
by the black lawyer Thurgood Marshall).281  
Indeed, the legal fight led by the NAACP, was just as visceral as the other aspects of the Civil Rights 
movement. Medgar Evers’ commitment and work was a major reason for their eventual success.  
Born in the Deep South, as a young boy Evers walked 19 kilometres every day to attend a segregated 
school.  He applied to study at Mississippi State University Law School, but his application was 
rejected on the grounds of his race.282 Yet after his graduation in Business Administration, Evers was 
soon the first field secretary of the NAACP in Mississippi. He organised boycotts and set up many 
different chapters of the organisation in the state. In 1955, as soon as he had heard about the death 
of Emmet Till, he got himself over to the location and disguised himself as a cotton picker, in the 
hope that he could glean some crucial evidence for the case. He also undertook important work in 
the court case that led to the first black man (James Meredith) gaining entry into the University of 
Mississippi in 1962.  
Having led so many campaigns for desegregation and wider social justice, it was very appropriate 
that it was Medgar Evers himself who had the honour of being the first African American to be 
admitted to an all-white hospital in Mississippi.   
There is, however, a twist.  
Evers was initially refused entry to the hospital because he was black. Although he was eventually 
admitted, he actually only used up 50 minutes of their time, because it took him less than an hour to 
die there. In reality, there was nothing much the hospital could have done. His heart had already 
exploded because a bullet from an Enfield 1917 rifle had slammed through his body.  
Evers had been shot as he got out of his car on his driveway; his wife found him on the floor a few 
metres from the front door of their home. He had done well to make it to 12th June 1963. White 
supremacists had tried to kill him before: the Molotov Cocktail had not worked (28th May 1963) and 
the car that tried to run him over just missed (7th June  1963).283  
In the end it was a bullet that put a decisive full stop to his paragraph of American history.  
Legislative change is powerful, and his opponents knew it. 
Social Tipping Points  
 
Human society is, well, human.  
This means that things can flip quickly because we have the remarkable capacity for self-reflection. 
This means that what appears utterly entrenched and permanent in one decade can be gone in the 
next. Social tipping points have happened throughout human history; they always had countless 
false starts because of the weight of the status quo. However, when they get triggered and new 
 
281 The NAACP was also heavily involved in developing important networks and co-organising various marches, 
such as the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom. 
282 p16, “The Assassination of Medgar Evers”; Ribeiro, Myra. The Rosen Publishing Group, 2001.  
283 Evers’ life in Jackson (Mississippi) was under such constant threat, that most of the time that he drove 
home in an area that was heavily populated with members of the KKK, he had police or FBI protection. It is 
therefore rather suspicious that on the day of his death, no such security was there.  
