Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 309 
(BACK) 
 
However, so much of Greek tragic literature is informed by that twisted principle. A principle that 
seems to be at work throughout history – both for nations and for individuals.399   
Any reader of Plato’s ‘Republic’, looking at these well-known Athenians talking happily with Socrates, 
would see the ominous dark black clouds just over their shoulders. They do not know what is 
coming, and what is coming will not be pleasant for them.  
This narrative viewpoint adopted by Plato in The Piraeus will seem familiar to those who are 
properly informed about the climate crisis. The consequences of pushing nature into a truly hostile 
state will be monstrous, and those who understand these outcomes are naturally highly attentive to 
the persistent idleness of our response.  
Looking out on the normal world, with the scientific data in the background, this seems anything but 
normal. 
 
Last moments in the Piraeus  
The Piraeus is at sea level.  
Life by the dockside would have been full of the bluster and banter that goes along with the trade 
and transport of a port. What Plato offers his readers, is a remarkably high vantage point to all 
human activity. He wrote the Republic with the advantage of hindsight, but what he discerned were 
some dynamics and principles that are timeless. Plato witnessed the crash that happened to 
Athenians, but he wrote his books to bring our attention to the deeper realities that lie beyond the 
surface of things.  
Plato had a word for this deeper level of things. He named it the “Forms”.  
Plato thought that beyond the bustling details of life, the shifting shapes of the surface, there was a 
world that was “more real”. Behind all those varieties of dogs scampering around the Piraeus, there 
was a “Form of Dog”. Behind all the flailing Flagri Fish caught in the nets of the Athenian fishermen, 
the was a “Form of Fish”. Anyone who was unlucky enough to be cheated in the market, would have 
experienced (by its absence) the “Form of Justice”. Anyone who had sat with their legs dangling over 
the Piraeus dock, gazing at the deep red hue of a Mediterranean sunset, would have participated in 
the “Form of Beauty”.  
The Forms. A world beyond this one. A reality that is more real, of which this one is only a shadow. 
Or, in more famous language, it is as if we were trapped in a cave of illusions – and the real world 
lies beyond us, outside.  
The best way to depict this division of the world into illusions and reality; into appearance and truth 
is to use the allegory written by Plato himself. The Allegory of the Cave. Arguably, the most famous 
and influential metaphor in the entire history of Philosophy.  
 
399 Barabara Tuchman’s “The March of Folly” (1984) is a brilliant, engaging work of history, that traces the odd 
blindness that has animated human civilisations; as the subtitle says, from “Troy to Vietnam”. Why is error to 
persistent in human culture? Why do nations and pursue policies that are against their own interests?  
