Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 86 
(BACK) 
 
Compare that, with a typical climate change press release. For example, “Today, President Biden will 
announce a new target for the United States to achieve a 50-52 percent reduction from 2005 levels in 
economy-wide net greenhouse gas pollution in 2030”.  
Questions have to be asked: What is the concrete reality behind these confusing numbers? Do these 
commitments bring us closer to the UNFCCC’s objective or not? If they do, how much closer? Why do 
the media and the public tolerate being given their information in such a jumbled way, especially for 
something so fundamentally important to every society?  
The USA is not alone in making things cloudy. Biden is simply following the standard way in which 
climate promises are now released and published. For example, in 2021, the EU established the 
European Green Deal that affirmed its intention to reduce emissions by 55% by 2030 based on the 
levels of 1990. Japan is committed to reducing its emissions by 26% by 2030 based on the levels of 
2013, and so on.  
 
By contrast, Economics would not tolerate such numerical ambiguity. It is informative to make a 
comparison with another major institution.  
For example, The Bank of England has a clear mandate, much like the UNFCCC. It must keep the UK’s 
inflation (CPI) “as close as possible to 2%”. The Bank must write an open letter of explanation to the 
Chancellor of the Exchequer if the CPI index roams more than one percentage point away from this 
target in either direction. In the letter, it has to explain how long it expects the inflation rate to remain 
off target, and the bank must also explain the policy actions it is taking to rectify the problem.  
On the homepage of the Bank of England’s website, the target inflation rate (2%), the current inflation 
rate (0.6%, as of July 2020), and two other key statistics (the lending rate and QE) are clearly shown. 
This is just common sense. In a democratic society, government institutions are accountable to the 
public and whether they succeed or fail in their goals, everyone has the right to know what is 
happening. This is especially true with something as fundamentally important to the economy as 
interest rates and inflation.  
 
Figure 13 a screen shot, The Bank of England website 
 
A visit to the UNFCCC website is very different. Anyone (whose interests include treasure hunts and 
wasting valuable time) could spend several days clicking around the website looking for key 
information. There are interesting articles about beating plastic pollution, how people in the Sahel are 
developing solar energy and so much more. It is a busy webpage with many layers and hundreds of 
articles that are related to climate change all of which create the impression that something is being 
done.  
