Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 282 
(BACK) 
 
The Trial 
‘The Trial’ (pub. 1925) could be seen, from one angle, as a modernist riff on the 
ancient trial of Socrates.377 Of course, the early 20th century that Kafka writes 
from is more manic and contorted than the classical context that Plato scripted 
his text in. Although both are struggling for the truth, under Kafka’s pen, that 
struggle reaches a twisted and perverse intensity. It is as if the Western 
European search for truth suddenly finds itself in at a darkly lit dead-end. 
The book starts with this arresting line: “Somebody must have been telling lies 
about Josef K, for one morning, without having done anything wrong he was 
arrested”.  
It was the day of Josef K’s 30th birthday when it happened. This central character is never informed 
of what he did, nor is there anybody who can explain it to him. And so, he is trapped inside a bizarre, 
nightmarish world within which he finds it impossible to find a way forward. A cacophony of people 
enters and exit this stage of his life, until abruptly on the eve of his 31st birthday, he is led away to a 
small quarry outside of the city and stabbed with a sharp kitchen knife – summarized by Josef K 
himself with the words, “like a dog”.  
We now have the word ‘Kafkaesque’ in English to describe 
situations that are overwhelmingly surreal, especially 
when the trigger to the anxiety is rooted in a losing battle 
with the blind, banal forces of bureaucracy. There is a 
strange comfort in reading his work, as we are suddenly 
no longer alone in our fight.  
 
 
 
 
Kafkaesque climate issues 
Why is that we can legislate for road speed limits around schools to protect children, yet we are not 
prepared to legislate against emissions speeds that will cause the forces of nature to slam into their 
lives like a 10-tonne bus? Why is nobody just dealing with this?  
How is it even conceivable that it took 28 COP meetings, spanning nearly three decades before they 
actually used the double F word, “fossil fuel” explicitly in an official text? It came out almost like a 
Freudian slip. The great taboo about not controlling emissions was finally, accidentally confessed. 
Until then, the construction of a global agreement, the moving around of papers and people, the 
ceremony and the speeches, all the administration and negotiation, all that business and busyness – 
for what? Had nobody told them what they were there for? Had nobody pointed to the fact that 
emissions are still accelerating?   
It all triggers flashbacks into extracts of dialogue from the shortened life of Josef K.  
 
377 Much more about this in the next chapter.  
Was he alone? Was it everyone? Would 
anyone help? Were there objections 
that had been forgotten? There must 
have been some. The logic cannot be 
refuted, but someone who wants to live 
will not resist it. Where was the judge 
he'd never seen? Where was the high 
court he had never reached? He raised 
both hands and spread out all his 
fingers. 
Penultimate lines of ‘The Trial’.  
