Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 54 
(BACK) 
 
Conclusion 
 
During the time that it takes Pluto to complete one orbit of the Sun (248 years), the drive of 
capitalism to gain new markets has pushed Western nations into the far corners of the planet with 
increasing speed. This appetite for material and human resources mostly advanced forward with the 
uniforms of nationalism in the 19th century, before it really sped up after adopting the corporate suit 
and tie to travel during the 20th century.78  
However, well before the surface of the Earth had been fully colonized by the rule(s) of material 
growth, another type of colonization was well underway. In the 1950s, it was not just the external 
expansion of a capitalist system that was happening, there was also an internal expansion of the 
market that was unfolding. Capitalism developed new markets by land and sea, but it also developed 
new markets in the hearts and minds of people.  
Material products were linked to all kinds of psychological impulses, appetites and emotions. Those 
who pioneered this expansion into the human psyche were led by Edward Bernays (the nephew of 
Sigmund Freud)79. This new guild of craftsman who fused together the subconscious with consumer 
products were extraordinarily successful in creating a culture of fake necessities. The awesome 
advantage of this psychological expansion is that, unlike the surface of the Earth, it is limitless. Once 
human instincts were hooked up with products, our search for community and connectivity, status 
and security, affection and affirmation would all become impossibly restless.  
Yet, oddly, this is good news.  
These demands are artificial, they were constructed and they can be deconstructed.  
The planetary boundaries that we are facing cannot be overcome by any arguments with the laws of 
physics and chemistry. However, we can use these hard limits as a reminder of what our true self is, 
and what true human development is.  
Charles Eisenstein writes, “A world of without weapons, without McMansions in sprawling suburbs, 
without mountains of unnecessary packaging, without giant mechanized monofarms, without 
energy-hogging big-box stores, without electronic billboards, without endless piles of throw-away 
junk, without the overconsumption of consumer goods no one really needs is not an impoverished 
world.  
I disagree with those environmentalists who say we are going to have to make do with less. In fact, 
we are going to make do with more: more beauty, more community, more fulfilment, more art, 
more music, and material objects that are fewer in number but superior in utility and aesthetics. The 
cheap stuff that fills our lives today, however great its quantity, can only cheapen life.”80 After his 
probing exploration of the modern economic paradigm and Eisenstein looks forward, and notes, 
“Sacred economics is part of a different kind of revolution entirely, a transformation and not a 
purge. In this revolution, the losers won’t even realize they have lost”.81  
 
 
78 These trade routes became so extensive and intense that it is not difficult to view the mega-rich oligarchs 
expansion into the realm of outer space as the next inevitable chapter in that expansionist story.   
79 ‘The Century of the Self’ (2002) is a powerful 4 part series by the BBC that documents the profound but 
invisible influence that Bernays had on Western culture. It was written and narrated by Adam Curtis and is 
widely available on YouTube. Episode One is informatively titled, “Happiness Machines”.  
80 “Sacred Economics – Money, Gift and Society in an Age of Transition” (2012), p29. (Available as a free 
download from his website)  
81 Ibid, p64. 
