Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 82 
(BACK) 
 
Imagine the painting of the Tennis 
Court Oath cropped in half. 
Imagine our lives with no space for 
the other, and with no possibility 
to take a healthy perspective 
about our situation. Imagine a 
society without uplifting ideals and 
virtues.  
 
Unfortunately, the current political space can often seem like this. It can appear like modern 
democracies operate with a very low roof. The rise of populism has encouraged people to point 
fingers at each other rather than up towards something higher than them. The angry Presidency of 
Trump, the macho Presidency of Bolsonaro, the gobby Brexiteer Nigel Farage - all provided us with 
the loudest examples. For those who profit from division and instability, it is productive to create a 
sense of claustrophobia in a nation. A noisy atmosphere of fear can quickly shrink our thinking down 
to the short term, to a narrow nationalistic agenda, or to a thin individualistic level.  
 
With this sharper historical zoom, that can pick out “The Social Contract” in the pockets of these 
men, we can see that Bailly was pointing to a very full democratic life. Rousseau was a thinker who 
argued that we really do lose something of ourselves when we crop things down to a size that is only 
big enough for self-interest. He would maintain that a society is impoverished when those pointing 
to higher ideals are cynically heckled by their opponents, and everyone then loses the confidence 
and imagination to think and act beyond themselves.  
 
The space above our head that democracy provides, is absolutely essential to our well-being.  
 
 
 
3. No cropping – of the public space.  
 
Finally, carrying around Rousseau in your back pocket also helps us keep in mind another important 
aspect of the public space above our head.  
 
Rousseau was acutely aware of how easily the fresh air of genuinely democratic debate can be 
polluted by commercial interests. He argued that when people met in a democracy, they should turn 
their minds towards “The General Will” beyond them.  
 
In 1789, that space was in a parliament, a pub, a published book or a newspaper – or just the open 
air. Now that so much of our collective thinking is done online, we need to stay attentive to how 
much of our social reflection is done through commercial tubing. So much of the worldwide web has 
been made sticky with algorithms and adverts that are designed to maximise profit, not the deeper 
welfare of the people.   
 
Robespierre ended up a silo of thought that was barely bigger than himself and he suffocated in 
there. The internet has been a tremendous force for enlarging democratic engagement. However, 
that common sense thought bubble needs to be protected like any other open space.  
 
 
 
 
