Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 170 
(BACK) 
 
Who could have imagined such a thing in 1955? There was no reason at all to think that something 
dramatic was about to shift. It was not the first time Rosa Parks had been mistreated on a bus. She 
was not the first black person who refused to move.262 Indeed, any view on Montgomery, any 
examination of Alabama and the Deep South, and any wide zoom on the whole of the USA in 1955 
only show centuries of deeply entrenched racism. There had been countless acts of violence and 
defiance, countless moments of ignorance and resistance, and so much hatred matched by resolute 
stands of solidarity. When Rosa Parks stayed put, it was just another dot in the sprawling scatter 
graph of black oppression.  
Human systems, be they transport systems or social systems are dynamic. As underlined in the 
previous chapter, they can move beyond critical thresholds and trigger irreversible tipping points. 
From within, before these points, the concrete realities of the present can look intransigent and 
impossibly heavy. Who could imagine from here, that humanity will exit the climate crisis with a 
warming under 2°C? From most angles, political, social, and economic, the transformative change 
needed looks remote. As Chapter 7 underlined, we only have six years left before the gigaclock 
counts down to zero for a 1.5°C heating rise, and one * year before we lock-in a 2°C rise.  
We have political commitments happy to tinker with small incremental policy changes, and a media 
that seems happy enough to go along with that. Yes, there are flickering signals of change in the 
climate crisis, but there is a serious amount of unenlightened darkness out there.  
Mamie Till 
The story of the Civil Rights Movement is well known. The marches and the speeches of Martin 
Luther King are etched clearly into history.  The pivotal role of Rosa Parks, the “First Lady of the Civil 
Rights Movement”, is also well documented. 
However, with climate change in mind, if we are concerned to find the most informative character in 
the dramatic social transformation of American society in this period, then there is another woman 
who demands our attention: Mamie Elizabeth Till-Mobley. The sudden vault of American society 
towards greater justice was triggered by her bold decision to have her son’s coffin left open at his 
funeral. She “wanted the world to see what they did to my little boy”.263 Her story illuminates the 
utterly improbable nature of the social change that happened from 1955 with much greater force.  
These are the details. 
Lynching  
For reasons that are absurdly skin deep, violence and hatred had become so normalised that it had 
become shockingly common for black people to be lynched. These convulsions of repellent mob 
violence started with arbitrary judgements against a black victim, usually accusing them of a sexual 
crime. After rumours were spread, the person was seized, and a public torture used to  take place 
that would usually finish with a burnt corpse hanging idle from a tree, “swingin’ in the Southern 
breeze”. For example, in 1931 Maryville (Missouri) Raymond Gill was set alight in front of an 
 
262 Bayard Rustin (1942), Irene Morgan (1946), Lillie Mae Bradford (1951), Sarah Louise Keys (1952) had 
refused before Rosa Parks. And Claudette Colvin, Aurelia Browder, Susie McDonald and Mary Louise Smith 
refused after Rosa Parks – these four women won the lawsuit Browder v Gayle in 1956 which affirmed that bus 
segregation was unconstitutional.  
263 Recollection by Joyce Ladner of conversation with Till's mother, in the context of a Brookings Institution 
panel discussion on the Civil Rights Movement Archived 2010-06-06 at the Wayback Machine  
