Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 8 
(BACK) 
 
 
Many students will finish their studies, and their understanding of climate change might not be 
much more than the simple diagram that they drew a dozen times, in Geography, in Chemistry and 
Physics, and perhaps in Ethics too. It is the diagram with the Earth being heated by the arrows of the 
sun’s rays, that then bounce up and down inside the atmosphere. In the absence of a really engaged 
teacher in the school who has the energy to push things further, a student might not have 
challenged much beyond a vague concern for the fate of the polar bear and an encouragement to do 
more recycling. 
 
This is not OK. 
 
If we do not applaud a mature student for completing a simple mathematical test of addition and 
subtraction, why is it common to enthusiastically applaud a group of mature students that have 
collected litter or reduced their plastic waste? 
 
Anyone with a proper understanding of the climate emergency would understand the need for 
bluntness. It is impossible to hold a sound knowledge of the science of the sustainability crisis and 
think that every modern educational system across the world is not hopelessly and dangerously out 
of date. The truth is, we do not advance our students understanding of the environment much 
beyond material that could be done in primary school. 
Until just a few years ago, schools would commonly hold public debates about whether climate 
change is caused by humans or not. Indeed, I have anecdotal evidence of geography teachers who 
still set that question as homework. 
 
WTH 
 
It is important to learn from history. It took the Catholic Church nearly 400 years to rehabilitate 
Galileo after he put forward the absurd idea that the Sun lies at the centre of the solar system. 
Although, to their credit, they did issue some postage stamps with his face on in 1994 as a form of 
apology. The problem with being slow to recognise the science of climate change, and the wider 
science of sustainability, is that the future of human civilization is at stake, not just an abstract 
Aristotelian world view. 
 
If it was possible to get hit on the head by a high-speed tectonic plate on the way home, you would 
certainly want your child to know about those kinds of dangers and you would want them to be 
properly protected. Fortunately, those plates are far too big and heavy to fly so fast, but we would 
surely update our Geography textbooks if that threat were real. 
 
These are not the hysterical rants of someone who has spent too much time on a weird YouTube 
channel. These are the just the emphatic conclusions of mainstream science. 
 
Education is not alone in its abysmal response to the crisis. Somehow, sustainable development 
remains an afterthought at almost every level of our social, economic and political thinking. The 
ecological systems that are the foundation to all life on Earth are approaching tipping points that 
would destabilise human civilization, but the environment is still not the first principle of our 
decision making. 
 
Those who ‘get it’ know that using strong language about the environment is very tricky. We have 
such a short fuse for negative information, and the reality of climate change is really just very odd 
and uncomfortable. There is a layer of our psychology that just cannot accept that the natural world 
could become so hostile to us. If anyone does insist on using words such as “system collapse” or 
