Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 159 
(BACK) 
 
Or as the Great Inquisition put it to Galileo, “Why is every day not a bad hair day?”.  
Back in the 17th century, there were many social, political and psychological reasons to keep hold of 
the old belief system, but the singular most important reason for the inertia for change was arguably 
the overwhelming weight of common sense in favour of the old Aristotelean model.  
But “the truth will out”, as Shakespeare would soon pen.256 The main problem with the Aristotelean 
model is that it was wrong. It just didn’t make that much sense of the movement of the celestial 
bodies. By the time Galileo got his telescope out in 1609 to observe the night sky, the whole system 
was under serious stress. To keep the Earth in the middle, scientists had got themselves into the 
most amazingly contorted positions with the data. They had continuously added “epicycles” (extra 
loops and gears) to the traditional orbital model.  
It was a situation not unlike a juggler struggling to keep his act going, as numerous random objects 
are thrown in his direction, with the expectation that he incorporates them into his flow.  
Galileo’s observations were the final straw that caused the old model to buckle. Despite the 
seemingly absurd implications of the heliocentric model proposed by Copernicus, and despite the 
initial resistance, the scientific consensus towards that new model became unstoppable.  
A new, previously unimaginable reality, abruptly, suddenly became true.  
Paradigm Shift  
The diagram opposite is a simple sketch of what Kuhn 
understood as a paradigm.  
As noted earlier, the history of science is full of dramatic 
lurches, from one paradigm to another. These short 
revolutionary episodes of science are marked by intensely 
creative shifts in understanding. In these shocks of 
turbulence, fundamental assumptions about reality are 
thrown into doubt (shown in the diagram in red).  
Once these shocks of turbulence are over, and a new set 
of assumptions are established, Kuhn describes how science then settles down into “Normal 
Science”. In these long periods, researchers test out the new rules of engagement, tidy up the mess 
and explore new possibilities.  
In the diagram, this calmer, methodical mapping of the new world is represented by the blue area. It 
is a field that is defined by the key assumptions of the paradigm. In a period of “Normal Science” the 
assumptions are not up for grab; they are not negotiable at all. The foundational assumptions of a 
paradigm frame the basic operating space; they dictate what is a relevant question to ask, and forbid 
certain results. (For example, modern Physics forbids anything to go faster than the speed of 
 
256 Spoken by Lancelot Gobbo, “Merchant of Venice”, Act 2 Scene 2, 69-74. (Written a few decades after the 
Galilean Affair, it is a scene not without some direct relevance to that controversy, because Lancelot is 
mocking his blind old dad).  
