Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 109 
(BACK) 
 
steam transportation and modern grain markets when so many millions died, especially in British 
India, alongside railroad tracks or on the steps of grain depots?”180  
There are still some shocking juxtapositions out there if we pause to look. Let’s take the third 
quarter of 2022 and throw together a detail of British life with the situation in Pakistan.   
Between June and October 2022, 16,775 electric cars (BEV) were sold in the UK – a rise of 44.1% on 
the previous quarter181. Both the manufacturers and owners might even feel a bit smug. These cars 
are typical of a high consumption lifestyle enjoyed by many UK citizens. On the surface, such 
consumption appears green, positive, helpful, progressive. Indeed, we could easily think that these 
advanced consumer choices have a certain nobility about them.  
However, a wider gaze is needed. Car ownership in the UK is 594 cars per 1000 people. In Pakistan it 
is only 29 cars per 1000 people.182 A statistic that poses two questions. Firstly, nations like Pakistan 
aspire to have living standards like those of the UK. But is that even ecologically possible? Would 
there be enough metals and minerals in the crust of the Earth to make them? Even if there was, the 
impact on biodiversity would be intolerably big. And secondly, for every new car that is made, 
battery powered or not, there is a major carbon output involved in the process. So, whilst UK citizens 
were enjoying the comforts, both physical and psychological, of buying a battery car, the wider 
imbalances were out of sight.  
What kind of wealth trickled down from the UK to the citizens of Pakistan with this upswing in car 
sales? The answer is worse than nothing. There was no trickle, there was a monsoon.  
Historic and current emissions have sharply increased the probability of extreme weather events. 
And in the third quarter of 2022, whilst those cars were quietly driven home by UK citizens, Pakistan 
was hit by what Antonio Guterres described as “a monsoon on steroids”. On August 30th, the 
Pakistani Environment minister reported, “It’s all one big ocean. There is no dry land to pump the 
water out. It is a crisis of unimaginable proportions. Literally one-third of Pakistan is under water 
right now, which has exceeded every boundary, every norm we have seen in the past”.183 Inside the 
headline loss of $15.2bn to the Pakistani economy there were simply uncountable numbers of 
personal and community tragedies. And as I write these words now in January 2023, an area the size 
of Switzerland and normally home to 30million people, is still suffering under flood water.  
As previous chapters have shown, we are still increasing the output of greenhouse gases into the 
atmosphere. In such a status quo, the most basic question must be asked: Are these lands even 
liveable anymore? When the flood waters eventually clear, what is the point in trying to rebuild a life 
or a community in a place that will get wiped out again just a few years later? 
Tragically, these lands in Pakistan were once home to the most ancient human civilizations. The 
Indus Valley, alongside Egypt and Mesopotamia, were the comfortable cradle of human culture. 
From cradle to grave, from culture to chaos, from abundance to stagnancy. The story of Pakistan 
might offer a tragic, symbolic set of bookends for human civilisation.  
The choice to juxtapose UK electric cars sales with Pakistani floods might seem inappropriate. It 
might seem too harsh, too negative, or even perhaps vindictive. Admittedly it is an arbitrary 
 
180 Davis won the “World History Association Book Prize” in 2002 for his work.  
181 https://www.smmt.co.uk/2022/11/used-car-market-down-in-q3-but-ev-sales-at-record-high/ 
182 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_vehicles_per_capita 
183 https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-62712301 
