Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 303 
(BACK) 
 
g) Truth Decay  
Plato’s maritime parody of politics is bitingly relevant today, in an age of populist fantasies and FAKE 
NEWS.  
Politics has always had a creative relationship with the truth. However, within just a handful of years 
that flexibility has gone much further into a world of post-truth and alternative facts. The techniques 
that are most frequently used to score political points in our culture today have little to do with 
literary skills or knowledge, and much more to do with sheer pugnacity. This is TOO BAD!  
However, the consequence is the same: truth has been pushed heavily to the side. The Navigator on 
board, with a genuine understanding of seamanship, is marginalised. He is SO BORING!!!  
Moreover, Plato went one step further. It is not only Plato’s concern that truth would be challenged 
by basic human appetites and drives, but he also went as far as anticipating that a democracy could 
dismiss the relevance of truth and reality altogether. The crew vying for the captain’s attention 
cannot even tell the difference between truth and fiction. Indeed, they do not even want to know 
the difference.  
Truth decay is a serious condition for any state. We mostly think that this rot is something that 
affects totalitarian regimes that invest in ‘thought police’ and which put a lot of time and effort into 
maintaining the big wheels of their propaganda machines. We probably think of Mao or Mussolini, 
not the background threat posed by having the truth eroded by pleasures and comforts.   
The central insight of Plato’s Allegory of the Ship is that all democracies are also prone to truth 
decay. Indeed, some states might become so intoxicated by half-truths and lies that they end up 
reaching out, in their disorientated state, to the simplistic solutions offered to them by major 
personalities. For Plato, these spasms of populism do not come out of nowhere. The whole 
democratic system is predicated on elevating choice and freedom above all other values, and it is 
fairly easy to hyperventilate when the air is full of this (especially in modern times in which 
capitalism doubles down on those absolute values).393  
Whilst Trump and Bolsonaro represent the rottenest examples of truth decay in recent times, it is 
important not to miss Plato’s fundamental analysis of democracy by being distracted by 
personalities. His critique of democracy is a systemic one – Plato does not think it is wise to organise 
a state by wiring the decision-making process into the desires.  
This blindness and numbness to truth has predictably had bad consequences for the climate crisis. 
Biden and Blair, Merkel and Macron, might have fulfilled their roles in public office with more 
professional language, but the blunt truth is that greenhouse gas emissions always accelerated 
under their premierships. The bombast of Trump and Bolsonaro makes it clear that they “dig coal”, 
but the environmental performance of democracies, whatever style of leadership they have 
adopted, has been consistently abysmal.  
 
393 This latent danger of democracies to lurch towards tyrannical leaders who plug themselves into voter’s basic instincts 
and drives, was most vividly seen in the rise to power of Adolf Hitler. And the BBC was brave enough to observe some 
similar motifs in the popularity of Donald Trump back in 2016 in this short animation of Plato’s thinking. 
 
