Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 93 
(BACK) 
 
Some zombies point to the humongous lava output that occurred in the Siberian Traps during the 3rd 
mass extinction event, 251.9 million years ago. This did indeed cause climate change with a capital C 
(bold, italicised and underlined in font size 96). This Permian-Triassic boundary in geological time is 
the deepest extinction of all, the outpouring of lava for over 2 million years pushed the 
concentrations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere up to a heady 2000ppm. Yet, if there was a 
similar flow of lava starting to happen in the last centuries, we would probably have noticed. The 
lenses of the Google Earth cameras would surely have gotten rather steamed up by now if there was 
an extra 3 million cubic meters of blisteringly hot lava sloshing around.137   
Other zombies point to the slow undulations of the Earth’s irregular and slightly wobbly orbit around 
the Sun. These cosmic rhythms were carefully mapped out in the first decades of the 20th century by 
the geophysicist and astronomer Milutin Milanković - a Serbian, who was as skilled and determined 
at his astrological calculations as Novak Djokovic is with a tennis racket.138 Yet the natural loops of 
climate change that he identifies are so sluggishly slow, they play out in cycles of 100,000 year 
(eccentricity), 41,000 year (axial tilt) and 23,000 year (precession) pulses. By contrast, the speed of 
climate change that has been happening since the Great Acceleration from 1950 is more like the 
blistering pace and aggression of a Djokovic serve.  
Finally, some suggest that an unusual level of sun flares is to blame. This is an interesting kind of 
theory, in the sense that you wonder just how anybody with their head so deeply in the sand could 
even make any kind of articulate sound. 
In truth, I am conflicted about even writing these paragraphs. I feel like I am typing inside a primary 
school, sat on a primary school chair, with my knees weirdly bent to get them underneath the tiny 
proportions of a primary school table. Do we really have to go this low? Without doubt, the output 
of such childish ideas has only ever had one purpose – to distract from the truth about our 
accelerating emissions caused by the burning of fossil fuels. They are non-sense, at two levels: they 
have no empirical support; and they are like the buffoonery of a clown who we all know only 
pretends to do magic tricks to get some kind of manic attention. 
No school should ever try to even entertain such theories anymore. But billions are still spent every 
year pumping out this kind of misinformation into the pipelines of the internet and the media, and 
so it therefore necessitates the briefest, pitiful glance here. Indeed, there are still geography 
teachers across the globe who invite their students to do homework or debates about the natural or 
the man-made causes of climate change.  
Pause.  
Do Chemistry teachers still feel the need to establish that nature is not made up of ‘The Four 
Elements’: Earth Water Air and Fire? The world of Chemistry has moved on a long way since John 
Dalton understood the atomic reality of matter. His “rule of greatest simplicity” was published back 
 
137 The P-T boundary event layered volcanic material 4km deep in Siberia, which if spread out more evenly 
would cover the entire dry surface of the Earth to a depth of 6 meters. For the precise details read, Seth D. 
Burgess and Samuel A Bowring, “High-precision geochronology confirms voluminous magmatism before, 
during, and after Earth’s most severe extinction” (2015). https://www.science.org/doi/full/10.1126/sciadv.1500470  
138 During the ‘July Crisis’ of 1914, as the world tumbled into World War One, Milanković was captured by the 
Austro-Hungarians as a prisoner of war – but armed with paper and pen, he continued his celestial calculations 
in his cell. He published his findings “Mathematical Theory of Heat Phenomena Produced by Solar Radiation” 
in 1920.  
