Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 178 
(BACK) 
 
The mother of Emmett Till could have turned inward in her grief. She could have shrunk away from 
the world. She did not need to invite the photographers in to capture the raw pain and trauma 
experienced by the community connected to her son’s murder.  
Yet, she was open, courageous, and unflinching in her response.  
And what did she do after all the media had moved on?  
The answer is that she committed herself to education about the civil rights movement. She boldly 
carried her experience on the long walk.   
 
2. The Media 
The Overton Window  
The dangerously cropped view of climate change that is offered in schools is mirrored by the 
continued poverty of the media coverage of the crisis. The long failure of education to present the 
full truth of our situation leads inevitably to a limited and pithy view of what is going on above our 
heads. It is not surprising to find that the general public seems to have little sense of the proportions 
and the depth of the situation we are in. In the absence of an informed and engaging educational 
input into the public space, the status quo will surely remain entrenched on its fast track to collapse.  
The paucity of the general framework of understanding held by many people and mirrored by the 
media coverage was illuminated by one comment made in the build-up to COP26 in Glasgow. This 
(delayed) meeting was proudly hosted by the UK who claimed at various points before and after that 
they were a world leading nation in the fight against climate change.269 On 27th July , four months 
before the conference, the UK government’s climate change spokesperson Allegra Stratton took to 
Twitter: “Could not rinsing the dishes b4 the dishwasher be your #onestepgreener ahead of 
COP26?”. Adding, “And if that is too hard a habit to kick. Pick something else”.  
It is difficult to know what to do with this statement. It strikes right to the heart of the problem that 
has beset our response to the climate crisis for decades. Individual. Superficial. Pitiful. Is it even 
possible to think of a more insignificant action? And then, to  have the audacity to offer an 
alternative if such a level of commitment might prove too much.  
This statement triggered a nauseous sense of vertigo. It either signalled a breathtaking breathtaking 
level of ignorance by a high-ranking government official from a G7 nation, or it was a breathtaking 
example of corruption - where fossil fuel interests use their direct or indirect power to distract the 
public from systemic reform structural questions, and guide the governments’ narrative line. Who 
knows?  
Either way, there is no good way to look at it. Tellingly, Allegra Stratton was a former political editor 
for “Newsnight”, the BBC’s flagship news programme. Indeed, the BBC is a broadcaster with a global 
reputation for reliability and depth that counts many graduates from Oxford and Cambridge 
amongst their staff. Indeed, Stratton is an alma mater of Emmanuel College, Cambridge. It is absurd 
that advanced economies have such a reckless level of ecological illiteracy at the highest places in 
their society.  
 
269 https://ukcop26.org/uk-presidency/uk-climate-leadership/ 
