Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 37 
(BACK) 
 
These extractions have relentlessly increased year on year, and the consequences have been 
formidable. Indeed, the wider consequences of our resource consumption are too big to open up 
here. It deserves our fuller attention in the next chapter. 
 
 
b) Biodiversity  
 
Biodiversity loss is a problem that is deeply systemic – both in terms of the causes of the problem 
and in terms of its consequences. Indeed, the roots of this issue are rhizomatic, making the puzzle of 
protecting and restoring our precious ecosystems very difficult; and the negative consequences of 
widescale biodiversity loss pose a threat to the entire operating system of human life.      
 
In the absence of a long-term rational framework for our economic development, humans are 
currently ripping into their habitat with a savage energy. The “Great Acceleration” has wiped out an 
epic proportion of the Earth’s biodiversity. In 1992 the UN opened up the Convention on Biodiversity 
(CBD), but every target has been missed because of our tentative and fragmentary responses. Indeed, 
in 2019 the UN published a landmark report44 (Intergovernmental Science Policy Platform on 
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES), May 6th, 2019) on the monumental depth and speed of 
this loss.  
The former Chair of the IPBES, Sir Robert Watson, notes that:  
“The overwhelming evidence of the IPBES Global Assessment, from a wide range of different fields of 
knowledge, presents an ominous picture. The health of ecosystems on which we and all other species 
depend is deteriorating more rapidly than ever. We are eroding the very foundations of our 
economies, livelihoods, food security, health and quality of life worldwide.”45 
In other words, it is rather like we are playing a game of Jenga with the natural world: Bio-Jenga. 
Pulling out key blocks of the architecture of the biosphere, and at the same time placing more 
demands on it. This is not a clever strategy for building a civilisation. Each time a brick is removed and 
then replaced at the top of the system as another weight, the more the tower becomes destabilised. 
The natural world used to be so immense and diverse, compared to the homo sapiens within it, that 
this wide base looked invulnerable to our ambitions. However, that pyramid shape has now been 
inverted.  
The documentaries “Apocalypse Cow” and “Seaspiracy” illuminate the unsustainable path that 
agriculture and aquaculture are on. Millions of species are clinging to the last fragmentary pockets of 
habitat that our great vacuum cleaner of ‘civilisation’ has not yet hoovered up. We have tacitly 
endorsed the evisceration of a bewildering array of biological niches, all for the sake of things as banal 
as a packet of cheap supermarket ginger biscuits or a pack of fishfingers.   
On its own, this ecocide poses a grotesque danger to our future. But biodiversity loss also has a 
direct impact on climate change. The planet is marked by tree cover loss that is driven by 
deforestation, wildfires, commodity markets and agricultural farming practice changes. The loss is 
happening at a consistent rate of around 240,000 square kilometres per year46 - an area the size of 
the UK. Within this total, the destruction of primary tropical forests (the world’s most biologically 
 
44 160 https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/blog/2019/05/nature-decline-unprecedented-report.  
45 https://www.ipbes.net/news/Media-Release-Global-Assessment. 
46 www.globalforestwatch.org/dashboards/global. (For details, see Hansen et al., Science 2013) 
