Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 73 
(BACK) 
 
It is true that democratic French ambition went dreadfully wrong with those who got caught up in 
David’s freeze frame here. Things would quickly become very dark and twisted, but in this brief 
moment at the Tennis Court, there was something genuinely beautiful and precious in sight.  
 
Indeed, the impulse towards democracy at work here was not an isolated incident contained within 
the town of Versailles, or within the borders of France. Democracies were gaining support above and 
below ground in Europe and had recently burst into a full flush of life in America.  
 
The commitment to open governance, and human rights would eventually pan out to dozens of 
nations107, and eventually include women108109, and different races110. This expansion of democracy 
would not always be accompanied by bloodshed, but the transformations of society towards more 
extensive democratic rule would never be achieved without serious suffering, sacrifice and 
solidarity. The fights for democratic rule had won many major victories in a range of nations by the 
first quarter of the 20th century.  
 
Thanks for pointing us in the right direction Monsieur Bailly.  
 
A twisted ideal 
 
But…  
 
Bailly is also pointing at something ignoble.  
 
It is true that the ideal of democracy in the Tennis Court equalises those who participate in it. 
However, it is also true the energy conjured into life in here illustrates the fact that ideals can dwarf 
people. So after giving proper credit to David for being brave enough to open up a huge lofty space 
on his canvas for the human ability to think and act beyond himself, we should then also credit him 
for noticing something spasmodic and chaotic in this moment. The Tennis Court Oath was not just a 
simple moment of pure enlightenment.  
 
The ideals that the Mayor of Paris is pointing to have the power to morph and mutate. Yes, David 
has invited to look at an idea, but it is an idea that took on a cruel and formidable material force. 
Indeed, the word ‘‘democracy’’ was originally intended as an insult. It was a slur against “mob rule”, 
or more literally “people power”111; and the suspicions about handing power over to the messy 
energies of the masses that are signalled by the word “democracy” will be played out with graphic 
clarity in the events that unfold from this point.  
 
107 The ‘Democracy Index 2021’ indicated that 45.7% of the world’s population live in either “Fully Democratic” 
states such as New Zealand, or “Flawed Democracies”, such as the USA. 
108 Another shocking feature of the Tennis Court Oath painting is that it is only populated by men. The 
playwright Olympe de Gouges wrote in “A Declaration of the Rights of Woman and of the Female Citizen” 
(1791), “Women are born equal to men… since women are allowed to mount the scaffold, they should also be 
allowed to stand in parliament and defend their rights”.   
109 It took the Swiss canton of Appenzell Innerrhoden (AI) until 1990 [sic] to grant its women a vote. Sick 
indeed. 
110 “Surely it is absolutely repugnant to the great number of the people of the Commonwealth that an 
aboriginal man, or aboriginal lubra or gin – a horrible, degraded, dirty creature – should have the same rights… 
To me it is as repugnant and atrocious a legislative proposal as anyone could suggest.” Australian Sir Alexander 
Perceval Matheson, 3rd Baronet, speaking in 1902. The Australian ‘Commonwealth Electoral Act’ in 1962 
eventually assented to their equal rights.  
111 Literally, “people power” (demos = people, cracy = power). Indeed, “cracy” is far less dignified than an 
alternative Greek word, “archy” which means “rulership”. 
