Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 187 
(BACK) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. The law   
 
With all the diffuse interests and angles to the crisis – from deforestation to divestments, from no-fly 
to no-meat and with all the myriad scientific areas of research – it can be difficult to believe that 
there is any really decisive way to get a grip on everything.  But there is one. We have the power to 
affect change at a systemic level, because behind every social and economic interaction there is an 
invisible but all-pervasive matrix: the law.  
If local, national, and international legal frameworks could be put in place to clearly frame the 
boundaries of our economic plans, then all the details could be settled with the security of knowing 
that key thresholds in nature would not be crossed. In those nations where there is democratic rule, 
these details could be settled through all the different organs of the democratic state.  
The details will be further explored in the final chapter.  The power of the law, however, brings us 
back to where this whole chapter started: The Civil Rights Movement.  
 
 
The Civil Rights Movement 
All the protest marches and speeches of the Civil Rights Movement were united in their grief, 
suffering and anger. However, they were also united in a common goal. And it was the combination 
of the two that made that movement so formidably powerful. The energy generated by the great 
leader of the movement, Martin Luther King, was not dissipated into different initiatives. It was not a 
diffuse wave of emotion that changed the racial landscape of America, it was something singular, 
and focused. The Civil Rights Movement had a singular objective – the structural change that could 
only be achieved through the law.  
Here is one simple example. Here is Jasper Van Zanten (16), a very 
modest, open young man who attends the ‘Willibrord Gymnasium’ 
in Deurne, The Netherlands. But between May 16-20 2022, he 
attended the first Climate Academy Summit in Brussels.  
After an hour of learning about the science of the crisis on the 
Monday morning, and then a follow up session about the CUTx 
numbers on Tuesday, Jasper applied his skills and energy to 
designing an app. Within 10 days it was done.  
Before Jasper the only way to get the vital statistics of the crisis was 
through an email with a rather heavy pdf. After Jasper, the numbers 
were easily accessible within seconds to anyone on the planet with 
a mobile phone. This mobilisation of talent, led to the rhizomatic 
mobilisation of the numbers, which will have further important 
effects in helping shift the Overton Window towards the truth.   
