Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 332 
(BACK) 
 
  
Main Text 
 
Pillar One 
Systemic Understanding 
 
Getting to the root of things 
Plato’s Academy reportedly had these words written above the main entrance: “μηδείς 
ἀγεωμέτρητος εἰσίτω μου τὴν στέγην”. If these words were spoken out loud by someone stood in 
front of that doorframe, they would have said, “mèdeis ageômetrètos eisitô mou tèn stegèn”. 
Translated into English, it means, “Let no-one who is ignorant of Geometry come under my roof”.   
The existence of this inscription above the door frame is almost certainly not historically true417. 
However, it is informative. It informs us about the fundamental ambitions of Plato’s school.  
Readers for whom mathematics has always been a challenge need not be anxious.  
This concluding chapter is not full of algebra and algorithms, formulas and fractions. It is not a 
chapter about cones and cylinders. However, the reason why our cultural imagination has put those 
words above the door, is that the background mathematical order of things betrays important clues 
to us about Plato’s wider educational project. 
The reason Plato set up a school in Academia was that he was hunting for the basic truths behind 
the appearances of things. He wanted to get to the permanent realities of the world. He wanted to 
get beyond illusions.  
As the chapter progresses, many connections with Plato’s educational programme and the Climate 
Academy will become clear. But the first task of any educational project is to ensure that it is built 
upon reality and is committed to the truth. The truth has a long history of being sidelined by 
economic interests, diluted by our thirst for entertainment and pleasure, suppressed because of its 
challenge to political power, and marginalized because it is awkward. These pressures on the truth 
are viscerally real today, and they were just as evident in the time of Plato.  
Unconditionally and unintimidated, with love and with passion, Plato planted the pursuit of truth as 
the first principle of his Academy.  
It is therefore useful to stand a little longer under the doorframe and think through why Geometry 
was so important to Plato.  
“Let no-one who is ignorant of Geometry come under my roof” 
 
417 The earliest evidence for this little anecdote comes from Joannes Philoponus’ (c490-570) commentary on 
Aristotle's De Anima (in De An., Comm. in Arist. Graeca, XV, ed. M. Hayduck, Berlin 1897, p. 117, 29). 
Therefore, nearly a millennium after the door was put in place. 
