Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 158 
(BACK) 
 
The Copernican Revolution is an informative example of Kuhn’s main conclusions.  
The sudden flip to Copernicus’ model of a Solar System happened long after the publication of his 
work “On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres” in 1543. His model was mathematically 
compelling; so many of the numbers added up, and it made so much sense of the night sky. 
Unfortunately, however, the old way of seeing the universe (with the Earth in the middle) was too 
deeply entrenched for his model to be taken seriously.  
Indeed, by contrast, the old model was taken so seriously that in 1600 Giordano Bruno was hung 
naked upside down at Campo di Fiori in central Rome, because amongst his heretical views was an 
endorsement of the radical Copernican view of the cosmos254.  Hanging him upside down was just 
his warm up act - to being burnt alive at the stake.  
Astronomers of that time had 
inherited a model of the universe 
from Aristotle and Ptolemy that 
had the Earth at the centre of 
everything. This model made a 
huge amount of intuitive sense. 
You are probably seated perfectly 
still right now reading these 
words. The trees outside are not 
bending backwards under the 
stress of monstrously powerful 
winds, and it is not that difficult 
to walk in a straight line. 
Wherever you are holding these 
pages, things probably seem 
quite settled and stable.  
  
 
 
Yet, if Copernicus’ new model was correct, and if Galileo’s observations were to be taken seriously, 
you must agree to the rather implausible idea that the Earth is hurtling at 100,000kmh through 
space, and spinning on its axis at over 1000kmh. 255 It goes without saying that we are still travelling 
on that crazy ride, every year, every day. A moment of reflection reveals this fact to be almost 
impossible to reconcile with any common sense.  
 
experiment in 2011 seemed to record a neutrino travelling faster than the speed of light. If true, this would 
have knee-capped Einstein’s “Special Relativity”, a fundamental component of modern physics. In the end, it 
wasn’t a true result, and Physicists were strangely deeply relieved and disappointed at the same time.   
254 It is a matter of historical dispute what the main cause of his condemnation was. Bruno held many 
unorthodox views that he was unwilling to recant at his Inquisition,  including pantheism and reincarnation.  
255 The Earth spins at 1670kmh at the Equator, and orbits the Sun at 107,000kmh.  
Figure 25,  A digital reproduction of Peter Apian's diagram of the 
celestial orbs from his 1539 work "Cosmographia". Wikicommons 
