Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 48 
(BACK) 
 
“every molecule of carbon in my hand, every molecule of carbon in the universe comes from the 
heart of a dying star”. After this stage there is a cascading sequence of rising temperatures and more 
dynamic and quicker reactions as different elements are fused together and new, heavier ones are 
born. The monumental exercise of gravitational force squeezes the inner core of the star into a 
dramatic final act.  
 
In these last few extraordinary seconds, the cosmic guts of the supernova, full of all the most exotic 
raw materials of the universe, are flung out into the vast expanse of space. You can find the full of 
list of elements in the Periodic Table, or for the musically inclined, the list can heard in the Monty 
Python song which finishes, “Bohrium, Hassium then Meitnerium, Darmstadtium, Roentgenium, 
Copernicium, Nihonium, Flerovium, Moscovium, Livermorium, Tennessine and Oganesson, And then 
we're done”.  
  
Once things have calmed down a bit, this eclectic community of elements (all with their different 
characteristics, weights and special features) are attracted together over time by the gentle but 
determined pull of gravity. Over billions of years, planets are formed. On our little planet, this led to 
organic life (a very big jump), then humans (a big jump): walking, talking bits of carbon. Or as Cosby 
Stills, Nash and Young described it more poetically, “We are stardust, we are golden, we are billion 
year old carbon … (and we got to get ourselves back to the garden)”.65  
 
Supernovas are therefore the mothers of Mother Earth.  
 
Resource Depletion  
 
The bottom line is that we cannot make gold, or any element for that matter. Whatever lumps of 
gold happened to get stuck in our Earth’s crust, that’s it. Fortunately for us, they tended to land in 
patterns to make them easier to find … and these places often become mines.  
 
Why do we need to know the long history of the raw materials of the Earth? Why is it relevant to 
now, and to sustainability? The short answer is that this is the moment that the story of the universe 
goes from startling to rather annoying. This is because life on planet Earth for us humans (like the 
rest of the universe) is under the dictatorship of something that Physics has called, “The Second Law 
of Thermodynamics”, or more casually, “Entropy”.  
 
Imagine that you are holding a box of chalk, and notice a small stub of yellow chalk, which you pick 
out. It is easy to think of this stick as a lump of gold taken from amongst all the other elements of the 
Earth’s crust. Now you need to crush this chalk into tiny flecks of dust. In the real world we call all 
this mining and manufacturing. Now you need to blow all these dust particles into the air as hard as 
possible so that they scatter all over the place. Then you can brush your hands together to get rid of 
the rest. In the real world we call this ‘sales and distribution’, after some efforts by ‘marketing’..   
 
Have the bits of yellow chalk left the room? No. Would it be worth the time and effort to look for 
them all and bring them back into one useful blob again? No.  
 
 
65 This is surely the most appropriate moment to recognise the most extra-ordinary lumps of carbon, Michael 
Wadleigh and Birgit van Munster. It was their work and presentation back in 2011 that caused a supernova of 
thoughts in my head, and a burst of convictions in my heart to work on sustainability. All the science in here 
can be traced back to them, and beyond into their sources. Michael’s groundbreaking documentary 
‘Woodstock’ (1970, Oscar Winner) featured Cosby, Stills and Nash in the opening track.  
