Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 287 
(BACK) 
 
Conclusion 
 
A book editor might legitimately ask why this chapter on Climate Anxiety has been wrapped up with 
works of literature. Would it not have been easier to simply list various points of advice into some 
bullet points? Given the complexity of the crisis, those suffering from ecological angst might have 
appreciated some straight talking.  
In response to this hypothetical book editor, my first defence is that each chapter of this guide has a 
particular ‘school subject’ in the background. Chapter 3 is plugged into Physics, Chapters 11 and 12 
are plugged into Psychology, and so on. This design makes it possible for the systemic insights of the 
programme to plug into different siloes of the current educational model. Secondly, this conclusion 
will indeed resort to bullet points. But not before a wider reflection on why this chapter was 
committed to works of literature.  
 
 
Fundamentally, the climate crisis is a “Super Wicked” problem. It is resistant to simplistic: problem-
solution thinking. Literature, can capture multiple dimensions in a unique way. It is playful, and when 
you really drill down to the roots of the sustainability crisis, the best way to both understand and 
manage the complex systems is by ‘gaming’ it.  
This gaming is not just conceptual.  
The most effective antidote to anxiety is action. It starts with words, it starts with the talking cure, 
both to ourselves and to others, but in the end – we really move forward with action. Climate 
anxiety is a powerful energy, that can be channelled into productive, transformative activities. This 
energy arises from deep insights about how the current system is failing. It therefore has a funky, 
edgy, fresh and necessarily creative force.  
The important thing is to express it. Move with it. Surf it.  
Write. Speak. Poetry or Prose.  
Draw or sing. Organise or protest.  
 
 
A few simple bullet points to finish:  
 
a) Stand behind the science 
Chapters Four and Seven are important because they lay out precisely where we are up to. 
The data and graphs in those two chapters normally function to awaken the reader to the 
close proximity of the planetary thresholds. Or in other words, the chapter provides the key 
numbers to take into the civic space (as most people are far too causal about the speed of 
change). However, they also have another function – and that is to protect a concerned 
