Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 152 
(BACK) 
 
Questions 
• 
When have you not seen an obvious truth in front of you? When have you had an idea fixed 
in your head that only became a clear mistake after far too much time?  
• 
What sort of psychological barriers are there to seeing the truth?  
• 
Are there people in your life, or people you have directly observed, who have shown deep 
resilience?  
 
Case Study Two  
Planets  
The value of holding onto your beliefs, even under heavy pressure, is evident in personal 
relationships. Its value can also be seen in the history of science.  
This second case study starts in the 17th century with Sir Isaac Newton - one of the most celebrated 
scientists in history.  
Newton provided a radically new and effective framework to understand the physical world with, 
but it got tested. What is informative here is that the testing of his theory ended with his work being 
emphatically endorsed.  
It makes sense to start in 1687, with the publication of one of the most extraordinary, arguably the 
most extraordinary work of Physics, Newton’s “Principia”.248 It laid bare the mechanical laws and 
forces that governed the movements of all the bodies in the universe - everything from falling apples 
to orbiting planets, and from the flow of tides to the trajectory of comets. Newtonian Physics had 
huge explanatory power – all made possible with just a few simple principles and some clear- 
minded mathematics249.  
After the publication of ‘‘Principia’’, it really was playtime for Physics. Newton’s laws were tested, 
explored, applied and extended in countless areas of research. That fun continues today. In 2006, a 
group of Physicists set up an experiment inside a box, the size of a can of coke. D.J. Kapner and his 
team (who were normal sized people, stood outside of the box) and set up two small spinning metal 
discs just 56 µm apart250. They were testing the gravitational pull between the discs, and they found 
that Newton’s laws were still valid even at such miniscule distances251.  
Having this strong frame of reference for scientific exploration was fundamentally important for so 
many advances in technology – indeed, even centuries after Newton’’ work, it was ‘‘Principia’’ that    
provided the basic textbook for the NASA scientists who put three  blokes into a metal box and 
catapulted them towards the Moon in 1969.  
Yet, there was a little pocket of time in our scientific history when things were not working out so 
well for Newtonian Physics. Whilst it was true that Newton had eradicated any lingering doubts 
 
248 Published in Latin, the full title was, “Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica”. 
249 Namely, ‘Calculus’ – a entirely new mathematical system that he (or Leibniz, if you prefer that kind of 
biscuit) invented.   
250 56 µm could also be written as 0.0056cm.  
251 « Tests of the Gravitational Inverse-Square Law below the Dark-Energy Length Scale », January 2007, 
Physical Review Letters 98(2):021101. 
 
