Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 326 
(BACK) 
 
Academia 
For the curious tourist, who is either willing to do the 53-minute walk in a north-westerly direction 
from the Parthenon or take the 51 Bus up to the Kratylou stop, they would be able to find a small 
park. Here, amongst the trees, wandering people and playful dogs, sat unassumingly in a clearing, 
are a few excavated stones in a rectangular shape.  
These stones have been there since 387BCE.  
In front of these blocks of stone, with a deep sniff of the imagination, you might be able to smell the 
ancient olive groves. Academia was the suburb, in an elevated area outside of the city of Athens, 
that Plato chose to set up the world’s first university. “The Academy”.  
These stones mark out an ancient place of learning. A place committed to a deep understanding of 
truth and reality.414  
The word education also has a past. The root of the word is ducere, from the Latin, meaning to lead. 
With the “e” added, we get educere, to lead out. And this is where we find ourselves, in this fringe 
area of ancient Athens. The school that Plato established in Academia was a place that enabled his 
students to take a distance from the hustle and bustle of the city. It was a place, that provided the 
opportunity to reflect on not just the city, but the self, from a wider angle. The Academy enabled its 
students to step out of false illusions, it helped them move on from dysfunctional patterns of 
thinking and behaviour.  
In short, Plato wanted to empower his students to be autonomous. And the Greek roots of this word 
are also helpful to consider for an extra moment too. The Greek nomos (νόμος) means law, 
therefore auto-nomos is the ability to set your own law. And again, there are two important aspects 
to this, one for the self, one for the city.  
The Academy was a place for students to not only think outside of the box, but to also live their own 
lives according to those principles that they had understood to be best. They were led to these 
principles through the pursuit of the truth, and not, by contrast, by simply following the customs or 
clichés, traditions or expectations of the time. This autonomy of the self was then to be mirrored in 
their eventual role as legislators for the city.  
The depth of reflection and their uncompromised commitment to principles of truth, justice, and 
reality, would make the graduates of Plato’s Academy ideal legislators for the city of Athens.  
A love of wisdom 
This last paragraph might have triggered alarm bells in the minds of the reader. The notion of a 
school of Philosophy providing a team of state legislators, governing over the lives of everyone else, 
might seem odd a best, and dangerous at worst. Is it not a very bad idea to put aloof, distant, 
technocrats in charge of the everyday affairs of the population? Are such people not naïve about the 
difficulties and glitches of everyday life? Is it not reckless to allow a bunch of idealists to run the 
state from a distant ivory tower? Those nervous about such a project could point to numerous 
 
414 As a footnote to this text, and to history, the ancient Greek Philosopher, Epicurus (341BCE-270BCE) also set 
up a school of learning in Athens. It isn’t really possible to do a decent selfie here either, as it is now a derelict 
car park.  
