Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 185 
(BACK) 
 
Conclusion 
A shock to the system 
A panoramic view of the climate crisis still reveals two things with clarity. Firstly, if we look up, the 
concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere has now broken through the 420ppm barrier 
for the first time in millions of years277. The pace of the increase is not slowing down, and yet by 
contrast what is required is a sharp decrease. Secondly, if we look down, the social reality explains 
why this is the case. For all the good will, and all the heightened rhetoric about climate change, the 
structural overhaul of our economies and of our hearts and minds has just not happened.   
We have not yet reached that point of genuine humility in which such regenerative changes are 
possible. We have not yet allowed the conclusions of science to interrogate the status quo with the 
depth required. Those who can see the current mismatch between the science and the social facts, 
struggle to keep both in view at the same time because the dissonance is just too jarring. The 
Overton Window is still firmly centred in the notion, “it’s the economy, stupid”,278 rather than “it’s 
the ppm, stupid”. Those claiming to be ‘realists’ still point at GDP rather than the GHG. 
A jolt is needed to push a general concern into a sharp minded focus. This jolt could happen through 
an external shock. The radically increased level of thermal energy in the atmosphere has led to a 
sharp upswing in the number and intensity of the violent spasms in nature. Perhaps one of these 
events will be so destructive and formidable, it will shock our human systems into a new mode of 
operation. The scatter graph of climate change impacts dictates that these shocks will come. Who 
knows if one of them will produce the reality check strong enough to break us out of ‘The Rigidity 
Trap’? (See Chapter 12). What counts against any natural shock jump starting a proper level of 
response is the fact that these events tend to hit hardest in the nations that are responsible for the 
fewest emissions, not the most, and these nations have a correspondingly lighter influence on global 
politics, media and economics.279   
Indeed, waiting for the hand of nature to shunt us in the right direction is an abject response; and is  
just as inadequate as the wait for the invisible hand of the market to do the same thing.  
What is required is agency. We need a systems response to a systemic problem. There are more 
constructive and creative ways to bring about this kind of Emmet Till moment – where we are both 
brave enough to look at the truth, and brave enough to demand the whole operating system 
changes.  
This chapter is going to finish by pointing at two triggers that could make this external jolt happen. 
The first prompts change from the bottom up, the second comes at the problem from the top down. 
The first revisits the importance of education. A major gear shift is needed in climate awareness, as 
outlined in these chapters, and schools across the globe need to treat the crisis as the emergency 
that it is. The second offers the chance to get a quick and secure grip on the key infrastructure 
decisions that must urgently be taken: through the law. The establishment of climate change laws 
 
277 This happened in April 2022. https://gml.noaa.gov/ccgg/trends/ 
278 First stated by the political consultant James Carville in 1992, “It’s the economy, stupid” became the de 
facto slogan of Bill Clinton’s presidential campaign of that year.    
279 Perhaps it is informative to note that despite the increasing frequency and size of mass shootings in the 
USA (cf. BBC, “America’s Gun Culture in 7 graphs”,  25th June  2022, public opinion has not shifted towards 
tighter regulation of guns.  
