Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 21 
(BACK) 
 
 
Introduction 
Recognising Our Limits 
An adult brain is the size of a decent melon and weighs over a kilo. It is filled with about 100 billion 
neurons1, and each neuron has thousands of synaptic connections with other neurons. This 
astonishing piece of biotechnology consumes around 20% of the total body energy budget as it 
processes a vast stream of data. But despite the remarkable power and complexity of our brains, there 
are some things that are just out of our natural reach.  
Right now, as you hold these pages, there are pet dogs tracking smells that we could never detect, 
there are domestic cats alerted to sounds that lie well beyond our range. There are millions of quarks 
passing imperceptibly through the Earth… and there are galaxies (far, far away) in which Supernovas 
are spilling out their enriched guts into the universe.  
There are many more dimensions to reality than those that we are used to in our everyday lives. To 
get a fuller understanding of what is going on around us we have managed to develop high-precision 
scientific technology. The modern A to Z of scientific instruments is a curiously diverse collection, from 
Absorptiometers to Zymosimeters and hundreds of others in between. We can now look out into the 
deepest past of our universe and zoom down into the whacky world of quantum entanglements.  
Climate change is a reality that is known through science. For example, the Mauna Loa Observatory in 
Hawaii has been measuring the monthly mean atmospheric CO2 level since 1958 to an accuracy of one 
molecule per million2. In March 2016, the reading went over 400ppm for the first time3; by March 
2022 it reached 420ppm4.   
So, what, you could ask? Perhaps as you absent mindedly stared at your box of Cornflakes in the 
morning, you might have noted that there are 5.4 µg of Vitamin B12 in every 100g. A high-precision 
reading, but that measurement did not make you suddenly choke in shock and awe. You would not 
feel compelled to share this nutritional fact on your phone. It certainly would not flip your worldview 
upside down and transform the way you see your future.  
The truth is that a reading of over 420ppm CO2 particles in the atmosphere should cause you to choke 
on your morning cereal. This reading is the key measurement of a dimension of life on this planet that 
lies beyond our immediate senses. This reality is understood comprehensively by thousands of lines 
of scientific enquiry. It is called climate change, and these modules will expose and explore why it is 
all so astonishingly and fundamentally important. 
A clear understanding of climate change is a brutal shock to the system. It is an offence to our common 
sense of the world. The sheer size and scope of the problem is hard to wrap your head around. Indeed, 
in many ways we just can’t. We are humanoid. We are mammals. We are geared to respond to 
immediate threats - we are wired to react to loud bangs, not graphs. But the graphs do not lie. Our 
 
1 PNAS June 26, 2012 109 (Supplement 1) 10661-10668; first published June 20, 2012 
2 To be precise, the reading is taken as the mole fraction of dry air. The results are published in ppm, parts per million, but 
the instrumentation is sensitive up to ppb (parts per billion).  
3 https://keelingcurve.ucsd.edu/ 
4 https://gml.noaa.gov/ccgg/trends/weekly.html 
