Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 241 
(BACK) 
 
Right at the heart of all our innovative advances is an inconvenient truth about the effects all of this 
is having on our host, the planet. This contrast between creation and destruction, that is being 
played out in a continual paradoxical dance, is not easy for us to square up to.  
 
 
 
This is the nub of the crisis, that the Industrial Revolution poured petrol onto.  
 
The underlying fact is that inventions cause obsolescence and desire. They create demand and 
supply. In a sense, it doesn’t really matter if the products appear to us as environmentally friendly or 
darkly polluting. They all require an energy input, they all create waste. Entropy is in play with 
everything. And in a capitalism, everything is geared towards profitability, and therefore high levels 
of both obsolescence and desire are fundamentally important features of the system to sustain 
itself.  
 
Simply put, we need to take account of the fact that the idiom “Necessity is the mother of invention” 
is true, but that it is even truer when it is flipped backwards. Rousseau would have said, “Invention is 
the mother of necessity”. 
 
And on top of all of this dynamic, the mathematics of the game have not been made easier by the 
boom in population since the time of Rousseau. Going from a global population of less than 1 billion 
to over 8 billion has made the innovation challenge much sharper.  
 
How can we play, create and develop, without destroying the playground? We urgently need to 
innovate our way out of this corner, but this innovation has to happen within a fundamentally 
different paradigm of priorities.  
 
Whatever we do, the first rules of the game we will play, have to be fully informed by these limits.  
 
We need to get inventive about our inventiveness.  
 
 
 
 
4. The Green Growth Myth (and others) 
 
Rousseau was able to step to the side of all the dominant assumptions of his time. That was not easy 
to do, because the enlightenment vibes about progress were so strong. He was considered by many 
to be a bit shrill and rather unrealistic. His critique of progress and growth was held by many readers 
to be a rather romantic bit of thinking about simpler, less urban times.  
 
There is a strong temptation to shun the kind of numbers and projections that Hickel outlines too.  
Trying to bring these basic facts into the public space, through schools, the media, or through 
collaborations with organisations or companies is just not easy. It is all a bit abstract; it takes quite a 
lot of groundwork (this is Chapter 13), and, most significantly, it just does not fit in with the general 
cultural flow.  
The dogma of growth is so deeply embedded in our thinking and the operating system of our 
economies that it is truly difficult to imagine or accept that the end game does not work. It is both 
odd and frustrating, that so many people when challenged about the problem of growth instinctively 
