Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 239 
(BACK) 
 
 
And then there are the batteries that we are going to need for power storage. To keep energy 
flowing when the sun isn’t shining, and the wind isn’t blowing will require enormous batteries at the 
grid level. This means 40 million tons of lithium – an eyewatering 2,700% increase over current levels 
of extraction.  
 
That’s just for electricity. We also need to think about vehicles. In 2019, a group of leading British 
scientists submitted a letter to the UK’s Committee on Climate Change outlining their concerns 
about the ecological impact of electric cars. They agree, of course, that we need to end the sale and 
use of combustion engines and switch to electric vehicles as quickly as possible. But they pointed out 
that replacing the world’s projected fleet of 2 billion vehicles is going to require an explosive 
increase in mining: global annual extraction of neodymium and dysprosium will go up by another 
70%, annual extraction of copper will more than double, and cobalt will need to increase by a factor 
of almost four – all for the entire period between now and 2050. We need to switch to electric cars, 
yes; but ultimately, we need to radically reduce the number of cars we use….  
 
Take silver, for instance. Mexico is home to the Peñasquito mine, one of the biggest silver mines in 
the world. Covering nearly 40 square miles, the operation is staggering in its scale: a sprawling open-
cast complex ripped into the mountains, flanked by two waste dumps each a mile long, and a tailings 
dam full of toxic sludge held back by a wall that’s 7 miles around and as high as a fifty-storey 
skyscraper. This mine will produce 11,000 tons of silver in ten years before its reserves, the biggest 
in the world, are gone. To transition the global economy to renewables, we need to commission up 
to 130 more mines on the scale of Peñasquito. 
 
Just for silver.  
 
Lithium is another ecological disaster. It takes 500,000 gallons of water to produce a single ton of 
lithium. Even at present levels of extraction this is causing real problems. In the Andes, where most 
of the world’s lithium is located, mining companies are burning through the water tables and leaving 
farmers with nothing to irrigate their crops. Many have had no choice but to abandon their land 
altogether. Meanwhile, chemical leaks from lithium mines have poisoned rivers from Chile to 
Argentina, Nevada to Tibet, killing off whole freshwater eco-systems. The lithium boom has barely 
started, and it’s already a catastrophe.  
 
And all of this is just to power the global economy by 2050. Things become even more extreme 
when we start accounting for growth into the future. As energy demands continue to rise, material 
extraction for renewables will become all the more aggressive – and the more we grow, the worse it 
will get. Even after achieving a full energy transition, to keep the global economy growing at 
projected rates would mean doubling the total global stock of solar panels, wind turbines and 
batteries every thirty or forty years, for ever…  
 
None of this is to say we shouldn’t pursue a rapid transition to renewable energy. We absolutely 
must, and urgently. But if we want the transition to be technically feasible, ecologically coherent and 
socially just, we need to disabuse ourselves of the fantasy that we can carry on growing aggregate 
energy demand at existing rates. We must take a different approach.”331   
 
Mike drop.332  
 
331 Hickel, p143-145.  
332 Sorry Mike.  
