Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 66 
(BACK) 
 
b) Global Warming ‘Whiplash’ 
The second important qualification is something that could be given the label ‘whiplash’. This is not a 
technical term, but it gives a good idea of what will happen to global temperatures if we suddenly hit 
the brakes on our emissions.  
Burning coal is really not a good thing to be doing. It is worse than oil and much worse than gas in its 
capacity to release greenhouse gases. However, there is a little detail about coal burning that is not 
well known. Namely, coal power does not only release CO2 into the atmosphere, it also emits small 
particles of dirt.  
There is good news and bad news about this. The good news is that these particles when they go up 
into the atmosphere actually help keep the atmosphere cool because they deflect the sun’s thermal 
energy back out into space. The bad news is that when you stop burning coal you also lose this benefit. 
Therefore, when these cooling aerosols (‘aerosols’ is the scientific term for these specks of dirt) 
disappear it will trigger a sudden jump in temperatures of 0.8°C.   
Ouch 
Whiplash is very painful and damaging both in a car, and with the climate. 
As with negative emissions, it would be better if this mechanism in the physical cogs of the atmosphere 
was clearly acknowledged in our projections and in the media that analyses them. 
 
Conclusion  
This module will finish by zooming in the key issue behind why so little has gone in the right direction. 
Given the complexity of the situation this might seem like an ambitious claim for a few hundred words. 
However, a simple chain of cause and effect can point to the fundamental problem: global heating is 
caused by increasing concentrations of greenhouse gases, these gases are mainly caused by the use 
of fossil fuels. It is the deep inertia of our global systems to move away from a dependency on fossil 
fuels that is behind the continued acceleration of emissions.  
The key point here is that this dependency is structural.  
It is bracing to see the stark reality of where we are up to, and given that so many individuals are 
making a major effort to do something about it, it is seems absurd that we find ourselves so close to 
these important thresholds.  
But this is the point – the individual does not have the power to trigger the impetus needed. We all 
operate inside a system of energy production that drives our manufacture, transport, * and * that is 
underwritten by fossil fuels. Until this overturned, we will only be making predominantly superficial 
changes to the global carbon footprint.    
There have been millions of green initiatives launched by communities, schools, local governments. 
These efforts have been matched by billions of individual actions too.  
This is awkward. We like to feel like we have agency in problems. It is tactile and rewarding to sense 
that we have some kind of control and grip on what is going on. And this natural pull of our psychology 
is matched in kind by the media, the UN and national governments.  
Such natural flows of attention and awareness have been strongly encouraged by the fossil fuel 
industry as it distracts attention away from the systemic cause of the crisis – the fact that our 
infrastructure is plugged into fossil fuels. One of the most amazingly resilient myths of modern 
