Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 50 
(BACK) 
 
scientists estimate that it will happen in: 10,000 trillion, trillion, trillion, trillion, trillion, trillion, 
trillion, trillion years.   
 
However, entropy will be a big problem if you are due to be born after the year 2300. We are 
currently extracting a mind-aching 3000 tonnes of material from the Earth every second. By roughing 
up the blobs of order to be found in all the precious metals and minerals of the Earth at this speed, it 
is very likely that valuable resources that you might want for your society will already have been 
used and effectively lost.  
 
The good news is that the United Nations is on the case; in 1972 they formed the United Nations 
Environmental Programme (UNEP). Then, in 2007 they established the International Resource Panel 
(IRP) who have started to track the amounts of materials we are extracting and consuming and have 
estimated what a sustainable level of extraction would be.  
 
The bad news is that there are no binding agreements in place to control our mining66. Therefore, 
unsurprisingly, some materials are close to exhaustion already. The most acute resource problem is 
arguably the case of phosphorus, because our agricultural yields (our food) are so dependent on this 
chemical boost. Yet, there is only a very limited supply of phosphorus it is mainly in the Western 
Sahara; there are little bits in China, Egypt, Algeria and Syria.67 68 More generally, every flatscreen TV 
that is manufactured has very real consequences for the reality of the crust of the Earth. For every 
luminous diode that lights up a TV Quiz Show or a David Attenborough documentary, rare Earth 
elements (REE) 69 like Lanthanide, Scandium and Yttrium are extracted.70  
 
If there was time, many more examples could be put onto the table. Fundamentally, they would all 
underline the essential fact that it is simply not possible to make an infinite number of laptops, 
mobile phones, car batteries, solar panels… and so on. Indeed, the key word is infinite. This is a 
closed mass system. Every TV or mobile phone that is produced uses up rare earth materials that 
will then be unavailable for people in the future.  
 
Such a reflection might seem too abstract to have moral significance. We might imagine that the fate 
of many of the Earth’s materials lies too far into the future to be of concern to us. We might adopt a 
cynical attitude to those people who await the arrow of time to nudge them into existence in so far 
in the future. This is not the place to open up a wide ethical section about those not yet born. 
However, that is not because it is not relevant, but because the crisis of sustainability of resources is 
absolutely not a distant problem. There are many key stress marks already, and what is at stake is 
actually our own security of life and of those close to us. 
 
A Circular Economy 
 
66  Mining is also one of the most exploitative industries on the planet. This chapter is about the unsustainable 
acceleration in resource extractions, and that recklessness is mirrored in the way in which the mining industry 
goes about its work that also involves many harmful impacts. The Responsible Mining Foundation provides 
useful information on how to minimise the harmful impacts of mining. 
67 Notably, Europeans do not have any.  
68 US Geological Survey 
69 China currently supplies around 70% of these elements. ‘Rare’ elements is a bit of a misnomer; it is not so 
much that they are only found in very particular places: the issue with these elements is that they are very 
difficult to extract from the earth in meaningful quantities so it takes a huge amount of energy and waste to 
get them.   
70 Along with a massive dump of industrial sludge and another incursion into the biodiversity of the planet. 
