Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 182 
(BACK) 
 
investment in the preservation of the natural world and have a profound concern for their children’s 
future and the future of their communities.  
Indeed, it is even conceivable that the strongly conservative media could flip to move in line with the 
mainstream science. This is because, fundamentally, climate change poses a devastating affront to 
people’s rights to life, and a right-leaning audience has key concerns about property, shelter and 
security. Proper coverage of the crisis would also illuminate the huge risks to global markets and 
would highlight the costs of mass migration.  
In fact, there is quite an ironic truth about the influence of neo-liberal thinking on climate reporting. 
This odd twist is due to the fact conservative think tanks and personalities are committed to the 
guiding hand of the free market and are against government subsidies. Yet, the figures for 
government spending to protect that fossil fuel industry are staggering – and far outstrip the 
spending on green investments in infrastructure. ‘Big Government’, often portrayed by those on the 
political right as an unwelcome intrusion, is doing a Big Job of propping up the old energy systems. 
In 2021, IMF research estimated global fossil fuel subsidies at about $6 trillion, with about 70% from 
"under-charging" for the environmental costs associated with the fuels275. In 2015 the subsidy was 
worth $5.3 trillion, and in 2017 an estimated $5.2 trillion. Viewed from another angle, these figures 
mean that public money is being used to destabilise the future at a  rate of over $10million every 
minute of every day. There is a graphic reminder of the cost to real GDP below – in 2021 it was over 
7%.  
 
The first time the IMF researched the true cost the subsidies in 2015 the lead author, David Coady 
commented, “When the [5.3tn] number came out at first, we thought we had better double check 
this!”. But he affirmed that the broad picture they established was “extremely robust. It is the true 
cost associated with fossil fuel subsidies”. Vitor Gaspar the head of the IMF’s fiscal affairs 
commented, “These estimates are shocking... Energy prices remain woefully below levels that reflect 
 
275 https://www.imf.org/en/Topics/climate-change/energy-subsidies 
