Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 81 
(BACK) 
 
 
He takes centre stage here because climate change requires courageous openness and 
collaboration. Not the opposite.   
 
 
 
In the Tennis Court Oath, and in the early days of the French revolution, there seemed 
to be a healthy and clear minded concern for ‘the other’. In this sketch, Robespierre is to 
the right of centre.122 He has both hands on his breast, in recognition of the nobility of 
the idea, and the enormity of the moment. His privileged background was much like the 
other Bourgeoisie men123 around him on the Tennis Court. Yet in these early days, 
despite the privilege and wealth that they had, they were gathered there because they 
were acutely aware of the injustices and inequalities of their world.  
 
Indeed, years before this painting, Robespierre had a deeply formative moment. He was 
the top student in a prestigious Parisian Lycée ‘Louis le Grand’. He had been chosen 
from 500 competitors to read Latin verse for the visit of King Louis VXI. However, 
because it turned out to be a rather foggy and drizzly day, the King couldn’t be bothered 
to get out of his cosy royal carriage and so Robespierre had to recite his lines rather 
absurdly into the cold mist. He went home in an irate mood and rather than take out his 
disappointment on an air guitar in his bedroom, this angry teenager picked up a copy of 
Rousseau’s “The Social Contract” (1762). 
 
Rousseau is arguably the true godfather of the French Revolution. His works were best 
sellers throughout France, and “The Social Contract” was the reference book for the 
revolutionaries. Or perhaps more accurately, it was their civic gospel. In the 
revolutionary years of   the First Republic, it was Rousseau’s book that was often seen sticking out of 
Robespierre’s pocket as he sat in the open atmosphere of the coffee houses, and walked around the 
Parisian streets.  
 
It was a great pick.  
 
Despite Robespierre’s toxic turn inwards in the years of the Terror, in his youth he had read one of 
the most open and forward-looking thinkers of the Enlightenment. Rousseau invited his readers to 
step outside of their narrow self-interests and become richer, fuller versions of themselves. 
Rousseau was a thinker who understood the human longing to live in community with others and 
nature. His Social Contract philosophy underlined the importance of virtues such as resilience and 
civic service in a society’s progress towards genuine happiness.   
 
Rousseau was not naïve about the difficulties that we can confront when we commit ourselves to 
the common good. However, when we step outside of our comfort zone in service to others, when 
we act with kindness and humility, we connect with something bigger than ourselves… and this in 
turn makes us fuller.  
 
 
122 In the fuller sketch Robespierre is just right of centre, under the outstretched arm of the man who is stood 
on the stool. 
123 Yes, just men. That half of the human population who reduced women to historical footnotes so often. Like 
here.  
