Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 238 
(BACK) 
 
is willing to speak on top of loud, uncomfortable, blaring noises that are signalling the probable lack 
of context to what they are talking about. Every time an organisation, company or school would like 
to put up the SDG Goal poster, or attach one of the 17 coloured SDG squares to their project, there 
is a case to be made for insisting that the words “200 billion tonnes of resource extraction by 2050” 
be stated in large letters at the same time. For example, SDG number 9 is a commitment to 
“Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure”. Good. But those three ambitions have to be achievable, 
and you can only know that by doing a bit of maths and science about the planetary boundaries. For 
the moment, there are hundreds and thousands of green initiatives going on, but who is adding it all 
up? It is great to have green incentives and green ideas, it is important to have innovators and 
engineers committed to a greener world, but who has been brave enough to just step to the side 
and ask what the final total is?  
 
Without writing the word fact again, there are limits to growth.  
 
This sharp lack of awareness and analysis about the limits to growth is evident at almost every level 
of our environmental awareness. From the big international meetings like COP, for both climate and 
biodiversity; to individual and governmental planning. It is absent in the media, and certainly absent 
in school programmes across the world. We have our attention drawn to individual actions, national 
headlines, or specific causes, but it is shockingly odd that we do not seem able to look at what 
everything adds up to. What we have is a public space that is dominated by soft appeals to voluntary 
actions about ‘doing better’ or ‘going further’. Most green projects should be applauded. However, 
when this is the only narrative approach it makes it easier to imagine that we have an almost 
limitless space to sort things out.  
 
Indeed, the example of the battery powered car presents a good case for us to completely revisit our 
language about environmental issues. The words “Sustainable Development” imply that you could 
keep repeating the activity and grow at the same time. The phrase “green growth” implies that you 
can keep on growing, as long as it is green. This language is nearly always used in a way that is naïve 
about the fuller picture. This is because if we were to flip our economies to using ‘green’ cars, like 
we have the ambition to flip to a green energy system, then there is a highly problematic backstory 
to this.  
 
For humanity to achieve a fully renewable energy infrastructure for the global economy by 2050329, 
it would require us to extract an extraordinary amount of material: 34 million metric tons of copper, 
40 million tons of lead, 50 million tons of zinc, 162 million tons of aluminium and 4.8 billion tons of 
iron.330  
 
In his acclaimed book, “Less is More” (2022), Hickel zooms in on some of the details. It is worth 
quoting him from the chapter “Will technology save us?” at some length. He brings to the surface 
what a commitment to continual growth on a finite planet looks like in real terms. “… the transition 
to renewables will require a massive increase over existing levels of material extraction. For 
neodymium – an essential element in wind turbines – extraction will need to rise by nearly 35% over 
current levels. Higher-end estimates by the World Bank suggest it could double. The same is true of 
silver, which is a critical ingredient in solar panels. Silver extraction will go up 38% and perhaps as 
much as 105%. Demand for indium, also essential to solar technology, will more than triple and 
could end up skyrocketing by 920%.  
 
329 The date of 2050 does not signal anything here about the carbon budgets for 1.5°C or 2°C.  
330 These numbers are based on the figures published by the World Bank, “The Growing Role of Minerals and 
Metals for a Low-Carbon Future”, 2017; and they assume that we will need around 15 terawatts of energy by 
2050 to cope with global demand.  
