Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 80 
(BACK) 
 
 
2. No Cropping – The Full Self 
 
David’s painting of the Tennis Court Oath frames a group of high-minded men.120 They would 
eventually be led into the revolutionary storm that was starting to swirl overhead by a man called 
Maximillian Robespierre.  
 
We can find Robespierre in the unfinished painted version of the work. His ghostly, sketchy frame 
offers us some reminders about the dangers of what might lie further on from the present. 
Regrettably, although he had his young heart and mind fixed on the common good in his early years 
– Robespierre ended up in a situation in which he could only see the whole outside world as a 
threat.  
 
After months of trying to defend and purify France against the enemy, the dynamics of the 
revolution got out of control. And in his final weeks, he retreated in fevered isolation to his Parisian 
apartment as the tight clench of the Terror tightened closer to his own neck. The last days of his life 
were spent trapped inside in a small committee room (‘The Committee of Public Safety’, 1793-94).121 
 
Sometimes history throws up examples that are so vivid in their message for us. In the case of 
Robespierre, we find a shocking example of how virtues collapsed into the most terrible vices. His 
life is an amazing compression of all that is both good and fearful in the human condition. 
Robespierre offers us a striking example about the risks and losses that we invoke when we lose 
sight of the value of ‘the other’. His last week’s demonstrate the dangers of a retreat into the self, 
into factionalism, or into tribalism. 
 
120 These men were not peasants carrying shovels and threshing blades with them. In fact, these men were 
mainly the bourgeoisie. Although they were richer than most, they were thinking beyond themselves.  
121 It was in this committee room that Robespierre was arrested. He was shot through the jaw during the 
capture, and the disfigurement and blood that this caused was reportedly very difficult for him to deal with 
psychologically… a problem that was soon fixed by the guillotine.  
Figure 11 Jacques-Louis David, The Tennis Court Oath (c.1791) (detai)l 
