Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 144 
(BACK) 
 
As Lorenz himself summarised, “When the present determines the future, but the approximate 
present does not approximately determine the future”.238  
Since the 1960s, all of the modelling involved in climate science has had the reality of the “Butterfly 
Effect” in the background. Chaos Theory adds to the jeopardy involved in our interference in the 
climate system. We were so fortunate to have inherited a climate that was so deeply entrenched in 
an equilibrium, but by rocking the boat so violently, we really do open up so many more pathways for 
the future to play out in radically different climatic scenarios.  
To return one last time to the velodrome, the sudden spasmodic nature of the rise in greenhouse 
gases that we have caused is comparable to increasing the number of riders in the race. In such a 
situation, the chances of any one bike on the track becoming destabilized is much more likely - and 
therefore the probability that a major crash will happen is also increased.  
Indeed, given that we are also trashing the planet in so many other ways at the same time, the risks 
are even more accentuated. The Anthropocene is a full-on assault on nature. The risk that a “3°C” rise 
will destabilise the Amazon rainforest is a risk that is seriously amplified by brutish deforestation and 
rampant bio-diversity loss. If we think about our overcrowded race track now, we might also imagine 
that we gave the riders several pints of beer to drink before they mounted their bikes.   
This chapter is not claiming that these factors are not included already in the modelling done by 
advanced scientific research. All these layers to the climate crisis scenarios are well understood and 
accounted for in the peer reviewed papers. The point of these additional qualifications to the main 
thrust of this text, is to provide a fuller understanding of the situation we are in.  
The truth about what lies ahead is well understood. Science has repeatedly advised us to not advance 
global warming, every increment increases risk. Now, having pushed the global temperature up by an 
average 1.2°C, the final lines in the sand have been drawn. We must absolutely not cross the 2°C 
threshold and remain as close to 1.5°C as possible.   
 
 
 
238 Einstein commented, “As far as the laws of mathematics refer to reality, they are not certain; and as far as 
they are certain, they do not refer to reality” (Sidelights on Relativity, 1920).  
