Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 322 
(BACK) 
 
In the absence of this map, we have a weird preoccupation with recycling and not tipping points. In 
the absence of this clear systems view we have a mindset that is focused on individual actions not 
systemic change.  
If our students still think that we can we just “grow” ourselves out of the crisis, in the usual clichéd 
economic sense, then we have not understood how close these limits are. If we still think that a bit 
more tinkering will do the trick, if we still believe that a few more nudges and incentives to 
individuals and companies might push the system onto the right path, then we have not understood 
how we got into this perilous position.  
Having a systems perspective is essential to understanding the situation. In its absence, there are 
just a bewildering number of details. When the zoom is moved to a systems perspective, the main 
features of the crisis become clear. Rather like the view of planet Earth from outer space reveals the 
major hubs of human economic activity through the shining constellations of streetlights.  
We are essentially an ecologically illiterate society.  
This illiteracy can be seen at two levels.  
Firstly, there is no overall guarantee that a student who leaves secondary school will be put in front 
of these planetary boundaries. We have not wired into our curriculum a bottom line that everyone is 
clearly informed about the proximity and the threat of the different tipping points.  
Secondly, this lack of a systems view means that individual subjects are operating in a way that is 
disconnected from reality. Take two subjects as an example: Economics and Geography.  
How is it possible that students can study Baccalaureate or Advanced Level Economics and yet 
sustainability remains only a marginal topic? How could any school claim to have properly informed 
their students about the climate change if the pivotal role of capital and profits in this crisis is not 
squarely put before them? At what point does the collapse of the entire operating system, both 
natural and ‘economic’ come into question? After we have made the damage irreversible? After we 
have crossed critical planetary thresholds? Are our Economics syllabuses not weird? 
(We would raise at least an eyebrow at a student who would declare their intention to study 
architecture at university but then qualify that ambition with the insistence that it would be a 
degree in architecture but without any understanding of physics. Houses should not be built if the 
laws of gravity have been ignored by their designers.)  
Why are Geography syllabuses so timid about the problem? It is a subject that has the opportunity 
to directly address both the physical and human aspects of the crisis in depth, but have much critical 
analysis is spent on capitalism itself? What if growth is incompatible with the basic stability of the 
atmosphere and human civilization, is this not an absolutely central issue to address? Why are we 
not asking it with focused intensity? Is this not the key question of both our immediate and long-
term future?  
The lack of depth and clarity in schools is mirrored in the media coverage of the crisis, which so often 
fails to put economic and social policies into their proper perspective.  
                                                 ------------------------------------------------------------ 
 
 
