Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 101 
(BACK) 
 
anthems and parades. The quiet restructuring of an economy by capitalism is deeply penetrating but 
it is also oddly quiet. But look more attentively at the dexterous moves of the hand of the market: 
you can see that is continually flicking away local interests for those in London with the capital; it 
always brushing to the side the external costs of the environment; it also forms a fist to bang the 
table as a reminder of short-term interests; and when it is needed, the invisible hand will use its 
knuckles to get what it wants.   
This tandem movement of capitalism and nationalism was typical of what was taking place around 
the globe during the 19th century. India, China, South America and Africa; they all found their affairs 
were being conducted by the hand of the market, at an increasing pace, an increasing volume and 
bulging energy.  
“Don’t look back in anger I heard you say”? 152 
a) Colonialism 
Why bring back these 30 million dead? Why rake up old imperial injustices?  
The truth is that, pointing an angry finger at historic colonial abuse remains an important exercise 
because the climate crisis is such a vivid example of the same imbalances and injustices. Look at the 
difference in emission reductions required between the United Kingdom and India. The United 
Kingdom has promised to reduce its emissions by 5.1% per year when it needs to do 27% pa for 
1.5°C and 8.1% pa for the 2°C limit. Whereas India is playing industrial catch up with emissions set to 
increase at 1.8% per year, and their required reductions per capita are far lower, at only 6.7% pa for 
1.5 and 1.7%pa for 2°C.   
This is a deep injustice, and it is compounded by the fact that the CUTx figures do not include historic 
emissions. The CUTx index only looks forward to what has to be done from now (when the 
remaining carbon budget is divided equally per person for everyone on the planet). Yet if we were to 
turn around and look backwards it becomes clear the climate crisis has been caused by the Ultra 
High Developed Nations. Since 1850, the Ultra High Developed Nations have put a whopping 873 
gigatonnes of CO2 into the atmosphere, whereas the Medium Developed nations (such as India) are 
only responsible for a minimal 38 gigatonnes.  
If a glass bowl had been put on top of the UK since 1850 so that it would have to live with its own 
emissions, it would now be suffering the systemic collapse of its Earth systems under the extra 
chaotic energy of around a 4°C warming. The UK has only managed to escape this hyperpyrexia 
because their emissions have floated off to all four corners of the planet. Indeed, if historic 
emissions were included in the calculations of CUTx, for what is required to stay under 1.5° or 2°C, 
then everyone in the Global North would have to stop breathing now. 
 
The key summary details of these imbalances can be seen in the graphic below (the UK is in red, as 
an Ultra High Developed nation, and India is in blue as a Medium Developed nation).  
 
152 This Oasis lyric is also an echo of a celebrated  
