Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 52 
(BACK) 
 
development of urban life is both inevitable and yet it will be characterised by greater moral 
jeopardies.    
 
The deep contrast between urban and rural life, and the huge cultural consequences that flowed 
from the development of city life became stunningly clear during the Industrial Revolution. When 
human life gets into industrial gear, productivity rates take off like a rocket. A nod to Stephenson’s 
famous “Rocket” train (1829) would be relevant here, as the steam engine was so important in this 
revolution. However, by today’s standards an average speed of 12mph and top speed of 30mph 
does really do justice to the staggering exponential acceleration of economic activity and resource 
extractions.  
 
Now, to zoom in on some details.  
 
For every product, resources are ripped out of the Earth. This happens at an ever-decreasing rate of 
efficacy and requiring ever more energy, because the easy deposits have long gone. In 1900, 
humanity only consumed seven billion tonnes of resources, by 1945 that had doubled, then doubled 
again by 1970.73 In the past 50 years, resource extractions have more than tripled, from some 30 
billion tonnes per year to an utterly unsustainable 100 billion tonnes per year today. If such a trend 
prevails, in 30 years, humans will have further increased from 100 to 200 billion tonnes by the year 
2050.  
 
In Olympic diving, judges give their marks for the execution and the beauty of a dive. Yet, this is not 
the only thing that matters. Every diver must choose, ahead of time, the difficulty of the dive that 
they are going to perform. Their marks are then multiplied by the value of that dive according to its 
complexity; for example, a Reverse 2 1/2 Somersault (305C) has a difficulty rating of 2.7  but a 
formidable Back 2 1/2 Somersault 2 1/2 Twists Pike dive (5255B) gets a difficulty rating of 3.8.  
 
If we consider the background exponential population growth and the dry land surface of the Earth 
as the first co-ordinates in our thinking about sustainability, it now becomes clear that we have to 
add a major multiplier to those numbers.  
 
There is a big difference between 10 people living a simple life of subsistence and just three people 
living an affluent modern lifestyle with all the resource extractions that this necessitates. This 
disparity between the Ultra High Developed (UHD) lifestyle and the Low Developed (LD) lifestyle has 
led some thinkers to propose a different geological label for the “Anthropocene”. There have been 
proposals to call our period the “Kleptocracene” or the “Misanthropocene”.  
 
To illustrate why such qualifications to the Anthropocene are justifiable, here are some examples of 
how many tonnes of raw materials each person on average is ripping up from the Earth’s crust every 
year:74  The average Brit (18 tonnes) and the average American (30 tonnes), the average Singaporean 
(50 tonnes), and the average Luxembourger (45 tonnes) are causing so much more resource 
depletion than the average human (12 tonnes). And looking in the other direction from the average 
human, Medium Developed nations use only an average five tonnes, and the Low Developed nations 
only three.   
 
 
73 Source: Krausmann, F., Lauk, C., Haas, W. and Wiedenhofer, D. From resource extraction to outflows of 
wastes and emissions: The socioeconomic metabolism of the global economy, 1900-2015 Global 
Environmental Change 52 (2018) 131–140 
74 UN International resource Panel, Global material Flows dataset (2022), Material Footprint  
