Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 280 
(BACK) 
 
Metamorphosis  
 
 
 
One morning, as Gregor Samsa was waking up from anxious dreams, he discovered that in bed he had been 
changed into a monstrous verminous bug. He lay on his armour-hard back and saw, as he lifted his head up a 
little, his brown, arched abdomen divided up into rigid bow-like sections. From this height the blanket, just 
about ready to slide off completely, could hardly stay in place. His numerous legs, pitifully thin in comparison 
to the rest of his circumference, flickered helplessly before his eyes.  
“What’s happened to me,” he thought. It was no dream. His room, a proper room for a human being, only 
somewhat too small, lay quietly between the four well-known walls. Above the table, on which an unpacked 
collection of sample cloth goods was spread out—Samsa was a travelling salesman—hung the picture which 
he had cut out of an illustrated magazine a little while ago and set in a pretty gilt frame....  
Gregor’s glance then turned to the window. The dreary weather—the raindrops were falling audibly down on 
the metal window ledge—made him quite melancholy. “Why don’t I keep sleeping for a little while longer 
and forget all this foolishness,” he thought. But this was entirely impractical, for he was used to sleeping on 
his right side, and in his present state he could not get himself into this position. No matter how hard he 
threw himself onto his right side, he always rolled onto his back again. He must have tried it a hundred times, 
closing his eyes so that he would not have to see the wriggling legs, and gave up only when he began to feel 
a light, dull pain in his side which he had never felt before.  
“O God,” he thought, “what a demanding job I’ve chosen! Day in, day out, on the road. The stresses of selling 
are much greater than the work going on at head office, and, in addition to that, I have to cope with the 
problems of travelling, the worries about train connections, irregular bad food, temporary and constantly 
changing human relationships, which never come from the heart. To hell with it all!” ..  
Opening lines, Metamorphosis  
 
