Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 281 
(BACK) 
 
It is, of course, profoundly shocking to wake up as a bug. Yet, this is even weirder, Gregor himself is 
not panicked, or paralysed with fear or shock. “What’s happened to me?” is hardly the scream of 
existential terror. And, complicitly with the narrator, he seems farcically bothered about trivial 
details immediately in the aftermath of noticing that he is a bug. For example, the description, “a 
proper room for a human being”, is followed by the tart qualification that it is, “only somewhat too 
small”. Indeed, Gregor is described as feeling “melancholy”.  
Hello, Gregor. You are a bug.  
The banality and economy of the prose is deeply unsettling. It is triggering. We want to shake Gregor 
awake to the seismic shift in his existence. Yet, throughout the novella, he remains so routine about 
it all. It is absurd. Radically absurd. This unbearable tension between the existential shredding of 
normality and the indifference of those involved is key to the power of Kafka’s work. 
And, then, just like in the horror movies. We sense someone over our own shoulder.  
There is nothing natural or necessary about human existence. We are just a truly weird lump of 
carbon, hanging around in time and space. Our oversized walnut brains are capable of producing a 
fascinating inner TV experience. We can even look into on our own thoughts, and out into the 
deepest dimensions of the surrounding physical universe. And yet, despite all this incredible reality, 
we also might sometimes moan to ourselves about the relative size of our bedroom, or the dreary 
weather.  
Existence is profoundly weird. How dare we patronise Gregor for not realising how odd he is.  
The uncanny is everywhere. We have just been dulled into calling it normal.  
This outer-body type thinking is a feature of climate anxiety. The features of existential angst are 
common to the experience of understanding the full scope of the sustainability crisis.  
Once you have seen the crisis, it is utterly bewildering to observe the passivity of the quiet majority. 
Do they not see the pathway that we are on? Why are schools only bothered about litter collection, 
or plastic bottles, don’t they understand the awful banality of such things compared to the overhaul 
that has to happen? How bad does it have to get before we are ready to take radical steps in our 
school systems, environmental policies, energy sources? Is it not bad enough that the concentration 
of greenhouse gases is at over 420ppm already? When the planet’s biodiversity has been reduced to 
3 cats and a dog, will people still be pleased to have 3 different kinds of cat?  
Welcome to Kafka’s world.  
 
 
