Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 9 
(BACK) 
 
“tipping points”, it is somehow easy to think that they are being overly pessimistic. Despite the 
gravity of the science, the status quo remains extra-ordinarily resistant to change. 
 
The truth is that schools, in parallel with the rest of human society, is just too timid, too busy and 
too preoccupied with meeting the usual targets to really find space to deal with sustainable 
education with any level of depth. 
 
I do not know how many people will end up reading these words. But these will be the first pages of 
the guide for my Climate Academy. I set this up about a decade ago during a lunchtime because that 
was the only possibility. It is now time to formalise all the experience and understanding into a 
decent guide that can be made available to every school. I am typing in the summer holiday because 
it is hard to find the space during term time (it won’t be finished until September next year). 
 
It shouldn’t be like this. Maybe it is time for teachers to protest by refusing to teach core content?  
 
Perhaps Maths teachers should avoid using the number 3 all year? Perhaps English teachers should 
avoid the word “the”? 
 
Would that be more absurd than not properly educating our children about the climate crisis? 
 
Finding the right seat (N°2) 
(1991) 
 
After the lecture in 2011, it took me a while to make sense of everything. How could I not seen 
things clearly before? I had heard about climate change before, I knew about various ecological 
issues. But something major in my head and heart shifted in 2011.  
Being a Philosophy teacher, I am often on the look-out for metaphors or helpful short anecdotes 
that can illustrate complex or abstract things in simple images or narratives. After a bit of wrestle, I 
remembered something that helped me understand what went on in the Belgian Academy of 
Science back in 2011. But I had to go backwards 20 years to find it…  
 
 
“The Upper Room” 
In 1991 I was visiting my brother who was studying Maths at 
Durham University. To explore, I took a stroll along the side of 
the River Wear that curls around the city and its remarkable 
Castle and Cathedral.  
To my left, a small clearing in the wood appeared. In the 
space, were several grand upright timbers, marked out in a 
roughly rectangular formation.  
Figure 1, Durham Cathedral 
