Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 103 
(BACK) 
 
observed in 2017, in “The Carbon Majors Report” just 100 companies were responsible for 71% of 
global emissions.154  
Millions, in fact, billions, of climate change deaths can still be avoided. But we need to be honest 
about the root causes. The depth of our decision-making needs us to be ready to look at the past 
and the present unflinchingly. If we are genuinely open minded about the problem, we would not 
keep anything off the table for analysis. We must not be timid about scrutinising capitalism.  
The popular phrase “necessity is the mother of invention” is arguably upside down, when we 
consider capitalism. An observation of our modern culture fits better with the phrase, “invention is 
the mother of necessity” (a paradox more fully explored in Chapter 13).  
If we are willing to ask difficult questions about monarchies and colonialism, why should we then 
stop shy of asking the tough questions about capitalism? This chapter will not back away from these 
issues. It will put forward the case of India as an example of how damaging a casual acceptance of 
capitalism as the matrix of decision making can be; especially when there are racist noises in the 
background.   
To get a clear view of how we got into ‘The Capitalocene’ (and its mantra of “the me, the more and 
the now”) it is helpful to roll back the carpet to 1600. This view will also help us see the damages 
that often get cropped out of our vision of things. By zooming in for a closer look at India, and by 
establishing a grip on the details of their history, it opens our present crisis with greater clarity.  
 
The details 
The East India Company 
In (precisely) 1600, Queen Elisabeth I approved a Royal Charter for the East India Company. This 
license provided a legal and business framework for British investors to get their silks and spices 
(especially peppers) through much shortened supply chains, and much extended profits. They were 
permitted to protect their trading posts with a private army. When the original license ran out after 
15 years of healthy trading, it was refreshed indefinitely by King James I, under the condition that it 
continued to make a profit.  
 
154 https://climateaccountability.org/carbonmajors.html 
