Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 100 
(BACK) 
 
British were only in India for conquest and extraction. There was a kaleidoscope of reasons for 
British interest in India. Decisions were made inside a complex matrix of views and values.  
However, it is sometimes helpful to just be clear about the main things. And the blunt truth is that 
British decisions made about India held profit as the primary priority, and they were taken with the 
loud racist noises in the background. In such a situation, the death tolls were tragically 
predictable.149  
Davis in his “Late Victorian Holocausts” (2000) convincingly argues that the famines of this period 
were some of the birth pains of “The Third World” (a Cold War term). In more recent language, it 
was an era in which the economic ditch between the “Global North” and the “Global South” truly 
started to become entrenched. Indeed, the life expectancy of ordinary Indians fell by a staggering 20 
percent, a deterioration in human biology probably without precedent in the subcontinent’s long 
history.150  Davis writes, “If the history of British rule in India were to be condensed into a single fact, 
it is this: there was no increase in India’s per capita income from 1757 to 1947”.151  
To sum up, take a look at the central image of the badge 
worn by the British governors who ruled in India. St Michael 
stands on the head of a Satan. St Michael is white, Satan is 
black. Ouch. 
For those under the feet of the British rule, it would have 
been very difficult to understand the Latin words that 
encircle the image, ”Auspicium melioris ævi”; not simply 
because the locals did attend eminent British public schools, 
but because the words translate to, “a token of a better 
age”.  
Maybe, the British just forgot to add, the Latin word 
“aliquot” – to make the slogan, “a token of a better age for 
some”.  
But such was the matrix of British thinking and decision 
making at the time: nationalism and capitalism were 
dominant. Just like in real life, the assertive foot of 
nationalism and xenophobia is easy to spot in the image: the 
angel is even dressed in the colours of the St George’s flag. However, it is much less easy to spot the 
damaging effects of the invisible hand of the market.  
British nationalism had all the colourful uniforms and flag waving, but it was arguably the quieter, 
methodical reorganization of a society into the black and white of double entry bookkeeping that 
caused the most damage. These financial forces do their work very discreetly, the don’t have noisy 
 
India, there were back-to-back droughts in the Gujarat and Deccan regions. This double hit, between 1629-32, 
claimed an estimated 3 million deaths. 
149 To put some early numbers on it, the prestigious ‘Journal of the Statistical Society’ contrasted 31 serious 
famines in 120 years of British rule against only 17 recorded famines in the entire previous two millennia. 
Walford, C. “The Famines of the World: Past and Present” (1878). Journal of the Statistical Society, p41. 
150 Davis, K., “Population of India and Pakistan”, Princeton (1951).  
151 Davis, M., “Late Victorian Holocausts: El Niño Famines and the Origin of the Third World”, Antipode, (2000) 
p63.  
Figure 18, Star of a Knight or Dame Grand Cross 
of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint 
Michael and Saint George. 
WikiCommons, Nicolas Jackson 
