Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 330 
(BACK) 
 
There is an odd parallel between a scientist pursuing a discovery and a lover pursuing their romantic 
dream. Both consider what they are doing as both a deeply meaningful free choice, and at the same 
time, as something that is simply necessary.  
When the pioneering Nobel Prize winning scientist Marie Curie woke up in the morning, she did not 
think about the day ahead in terms of being happy or sad. She did not weigh up what to do after 
breakfast in such a simplistic way. She would have considered such categories for understanding her 
life and work as laughably, absurdly, irrelevant. In her research into uranium rays she was “onto 
something” which awoke so many dimensions of her humanity. Put simply, she loved what she was 
doing.  
Indeed, a third type of person can be added to this little group of scientists and lovers: a climate 
activist. There is a sense of revelation and vertigo when you see the climate crisis in its full systems 
perspective. The crisis poses the deepest questions of purpose and value. Why do we have 
economies? Who do they serve? What kind of activities do I find meaningful in life? When do I enjoy 
a sense of well-being? What will I devote myself to in life?  
Once we are over the hump of being intimidated or anxious about looking at the full systemic truth 
of things, then a whole new set of narratives about the crisis come into play. Instead of the clichés 
about individual actions that schools typically promote; once we are brave enough to think and act 
more systemically; there are a wide range of empowering storylines that plug into a deeper set of 
skills and meanings in us.   
 
 
This final chapter will be structured into 3 sections. Each of these sections relate to the 3 pillars of 
the Climate Academy, and thereby as a whole, it offers an overview of the programme:  
 
1. Systemic Understanding  
Having a clear view of the sustainability crisis, at a systemic level, is the weirdest, most dangerous 
oversight of our modern educational programmes. The Climate Academy is dedicated to putting this 
understanding in place across the world.  
2. Civic Engagement  
It is no use, just understanding the problem. We need students with the civic energy to actually 
change it. Plato himself had a role model who inspired him to do this. That man was Socrates, Plato’s 
teacher. So, a teacher inspires a student, who becomes a teacher, and so on… 
The details will become clear in the second section of this chapter. For now, it is just important to 
underline that the Climate Academy is committed to the idea that the transformation of society 
through education can happen quickly. Not just through the mind, but through actions.  
3. Virtues  
This transformation does not happen easily. The ‘leading out’ of education from old patterns of 
thinking and behaviour requires character. It requires courage, resilience, creativity… and so on. The 
