Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 293 
(BACK) 
 
The Piraeus  
This chapter is going to point at the Piraeus.  
That place might seem like a startlingly odd choice.  
What could a busy shipping port on the outskirts of Athens380 tell us about the human condition? 
Why is a modern industrial suburb globally relevant? After 14 wide ranging chapters, from the 
natural sciences to different human sciences, is it not a bit odd to finish everything in such an 
unremarkable corner of Greece? (with apologies to any fans of Olympiakos FC, whose stadium is 
located there).   
If there was going to be a symbolic location that might effectively 
pull things together the diverse dimensions of this guidebook, we 
might expect it to be universally known. Perhaps it would be a place 
that symbolized our deepest history, such as Cairo or The Rift Valley. 
Perhaps it would be a place that we might point to as symbolic of 
our future well-being, such as the Amazon Rainforest or the pristine 
ice of Antarctica.  
What about Angkor Wat? A stunning ancient Cambodian city whose 
sudden collapse has been linked to the mismanagement of the 
water supply.   
What about Easter Island? A remote island that some scholars 
believe suffered a collapse due to its ecocidal practices. Perhaps 
their striking Moai statues have a deeply important story to tell us?  
What about Beijing or Nanjing? Rome or Athens? Indeed, surely 
Athens is a better candidate than the Piraeus, its scruffier suburb that lies to the south of the centre.  
There are many candidate cities and places, many are more far more famous.  
But we are going to Piraeus.  
 
It is a place that carries with it many layers of symbolic meaning that can help guide us forward, 
away from the climate crisis. With the help of the artful Plato, this harbour of ancient Athens will 
provide the location to bring this guidebook to a close.   
The rest of this chapter will explain why.  
 
 
 
380 The Piraeus is the 8th busiest in the world (Singapore is the busiest).  
Figure 53, Moai at Rano Raraku, 
Easter Island. Wikicommons, Aurbina.
