Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 235 
(BACK) 
 
those who had the most to lose. Ultimately, we could find ourselves wrestling to control our 
property with military force. A very severe case of affluenza.  
 
It is easy to see how Rousseau’s profoundly negative view of innovation and growth, led many 
leading cultural and political figures to take a distance from him during an age of bulging optimism.  
 
However, it is important to note at this early stage that Rousseau is anything but a simple man and a 
simple thinker. His view of innovation is complex and nuanced. He did not argue for a castration of 
human creativity, he saw it as an essential, primitive instinct that could not be deleted. He has a very 
constructive and progressive set of ideas about what to do with our beautiful ability to transcend 
ourselves, but that will be brought into play at the end of the chapter.  
 
For now, it is simply important to note that Rousseau, centuries before we had computers powerful 
enough to crunch all the data on resource extractions, and decades before the Industrial Revolution 
really got steamed up, was observing that innovation would eventually bring us right up close to 
some uncomfortable planetary, and social boundaries.  
 
 
2. Limits to Growth  
   
It is now possible to know with a high level of confidence how close we are to the various planetary 
boundaries, and how many deposits of natural resources are left in the crust of the Earth. After the 
abstract reflections of Rousseau, it is important to make sure that his anxieties about growth and 
progress are grounded in reality.  
 
In defence of the subject that I love and teach every school day, Philosophy is a discipline that is 
dedicated to both rational speculation and exploration, and, at the same time, it is committed to a 
rigorous attention to empirical data and evidence.  
 
The vital statistics of our situation will be opened up in a moment, but before that, a basic fact has to 
be planted back into the centre of our attention. This fact requires no complicated calculations or 
search for evidence. It is just something that is obvious to common sense. It is a fact of clear 
reasoning.  
 
This fact establishes the framework for any proper, wider analysis of innovation. 
 
Yet, oddly, this fact is so often, and so easily, forgotten or ignored by us.  
 
The fact is: this Earth is a finite space.  
 
It is incapable of supporting infinite growth – of both human population and consumption. All the 
previous chapters have been written under (large space) standing324 and exploring this fact. This section of 
Chapter 13 will reaffirm some critical points made in the earlier reading about our Closed Mass 
System. And if the word “fact” is now getting irritating inside this section, because it keeps 
appearing, that is simply a symbolic representation of how inconvenient this fact is to the current 
economic paradigm of capitalism, and it’s imperative of material growth.  
 
324 In English, the word ‘understanding’ has a nice built-in modesty to it; in contrast to the French, ‘compris’, 
and the Dutch, ‘begrip’, which are more like ‘grasping’. Of course, an English writer could use the word ‘grasp’ 
too – all of which is a good illustration of the wonderful agility English has as a language, because of its hybrid 
past.  
