Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 175 
(BACK) 
 
Main Text 
Facing the truth 
 
1. Schools  
Let’s be brutally honest, climate education is far too saccharin. It is artificially sweet and has no real 
nutritional or energy value. Indeed, actual Saccharin (C7H5NO3S) does not react chemically with other 
food ingredients around it, and after the fake high that it provides, there is a bitter aftertaste. For 
those who have a clear view of the proportions of the crisis, it is truly eye-watering to observe how 
so few educational initiatives in school get beyond the usual climate change clichés.  
Climate Change Bingo! 
Queue Kitsch music.   
“Who says that the Climate Academy does not put the fun into the fundamentals?”, asks the 
glittering gameshow host.  
“It is time for Climate Change Bingo”, he announces, to the thrill of the studio audience.  
 
This game is open to anyone aged 13 or over. Before that age, it is wonderfully legitimate to increase 
awareness about the environmental crisis, through every tactile and resonant issue. Unfortunately, 
the deeper truths about what lies ahead could cause damage to your head and heart. So, enjoy your 
innocence and freedom, it is profoundly beautiful, like the natural world.  
From 13 years old, because your future is threatened by massive systemic failure, you have the right 
to know what is going on. You should be equipped with the key competences that enable you to play 
your role effectively in the positive changes ahead.  
Health Warning – this game might cause some people to choke.  
The reality of Climate Change is an offence to common sense.  
Equipment 
Any of the following:  
• 
a secondary school website that speaks about its commitment to the environment 
• 
a speech by a school leader, or teacher that addresses climate change 
• 
a letter from the school to the parents about their commitment to a greener future 
A pen 
2 Climate Change Bingo Cards: 
• 
Greenwash School 
• 
Deep Green School 
A tough skin – to raise questions about the status quo  
