Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 305 
(BACK) 
 
 
h) Cephalus   
As we have already seen, for the modern reader, that place of the Piraeus requires some significant 
excavation for its symbolic meaning to become clear. What should not be doubted is the 
purposefulness with which Plato chose it as the location for his masterpiece.  
Here now is the last layer of excavation: it concerns the character who features in the first real 
dialogue of the book. He is a man called Cephalus.  
Within the first few lines of the ‘Republic’, we find him conversation with Socrates. Again, Cephalus 
has not been selected by chance. Rather like in a chess game, the opening moves cannot be 
executed carelessly – each piece, and its location, have very strategic roles to play. Having clarity at 
the start of a game makes all of the moves that follow more secure and powerful. 
Who was Cephalus? Why pick him from a huge cast of Athenian characters?  
Plato could have picked all kinds of celebrities to “get down”395 into a conversation with Socrates in 
the Piraeus. In other books, Socrates is planted into a conversation with a famous Army General 
(Alcibiades), Priest (Euthyphro), an aristocrat (Phaedrus), a comic (Aristophanes), a lawyer 
(Pausanias), or a slave (Meno)… Yet here, he picks up the man Cephalus and puts him onto the stage.  
Cephalus was rich and retired. His family armaments business had done very well, and he had lived a 
full life. He had respected the gods and followed the values of his day. He represents the simple 
human appetites (ἐπιθυμία, epithumia) – for sleep, food, drink, sex and material wealth. Cephalus 
has ‘been there, done that’ and now he simply wants a quiet life.  
Cephalus starts by informing Socrates that he did not see the festival because he has grown too old 
now to go trekking down into town too often. He elaborates on his situation by thinking back to the 
good old days when he was more mobile and able to follow the prompting of his desires. He tells 
Socrates about his friends: “When they meet, most of the members of our group lament, longing for 
the pleasures of youth and reminiscing about sex, about drinking bouts and feasts and all that goes 
with things of that sort” (329a). Socrates tries to push the conversation past jovial banter about 
these base appetites, but Cephalus brushes him off. Cephalus is a businessman who does not see the 
need for deep reflection. He could crudely be labelled as ‘a bourgeois philistine’ today.396 
The Pireaus was primarily a place of trade. Cephalus was primarily a man of business. We know from 
the historical jigsaw pieces that Cephalus was a ‘metic’ (ie., a foreign trader who resided in Athens, 
but did not have citizenship).   
 
395 The ‘Republic’ starts with the now famous opening line, “Yesterday I went down to the Piraeus…”. The 
“going down” is a key concept. The truth, in ancient culture and still in shadow today, is ‘up there’. Like Moses, 
Mohammed, and countless others, the truth is often given or acquired by holy men on the mountains…. who 
then descend to share the truth with everyone else. In this case, Socrates is the one who understands ‘the 
truth’ (modestly) and he is going down to the Piraeus to draw others towards it.  
 
396 Nabokov describes a Philistine as: “A full-grown person whose interests are of a material and commonplace 
nature, and whose mentality is formed of the stock ideas and conventional ideals of his or her group and 
time”. (Nabokov, Lectures on Russian Literature, essay Philistines and Philistinism). 
