Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 12 
(BACK) 
 
to see or feel how everything fits together. It is a most basic human activity to search for a home, for 
somewhere to rest. Even if we do not admit it to ourselves, we all seek a seat from where everything 
can make settled sense.  
Of course, in the shadow of the historic Durham Cathedral this sculpture has a clear religious 
symbolism. But good art triggers many different levels of revelation. Good art can provoke a whole 
range of thoughts.  
By the end of 1991 the sculpture was withdrawn because the wood had rotted too much, but that 
was certainly not true for the ideas it provoked.  
 
 
Finding the right seat (N°3) 
The common details of climate change had been familiar to me. Storms, coal mines, polar bears, 
rising temperature graphs, floods, deforestation, recycling, oil tankers and pipelines… but I now 
understood how it all fitted together, I got a proper perspective. I saw for the first time, the real 
depth of the problem. What happened in the short lecture was that I had jumped from just seeing 
lots of details about something, to an awareness of the system.  
In the Belgian Royal Academy of Science, in that conference room, I had found the right seat to look 
at everything.  
Take the global temperature rise as an example.  
Looking at some particulars is informative: the increased intensity and frequency of hurricanes, the 
fate of the polar bears and the rise in the number and length of destructive heatwaves – they are all 
important details. But this is like noticing the details of the plates, jars and table-tops on the 
individual trunks of “The Upper Room”. They can catch the attention from a distance, but they are 
not what it is all about.  
But climate change cannot be properly understood like this. These are only a few fragmentary pieces 
of the jigsaw. Global temperature rises must first be thought about as a systemic issue. It is only 
when we get the right vantage point with temperature that all the other details make any proper 
sense. Sitting in the right place to look at the data and the trends is fundamentally important.  
Indeed, the details can be misleading. For example, taken from a British perspective, a temperature 
rise of 2°C does not sound like a big deal. In fact, on most days in Britain an extra 2°C would be very 
welcome indeed.  
As Wilbourn’s chiselled art illuminated, having the bigger picture is not just a helpful extra: it really is 
what it is all about.  
This is how we must first think about temperature rise. Anybody with a 2°C temperature rise in their 
own body (their own private biological system) will not feel good. It makes you fatigued and 
feverish, unable to function at a normal level. Sustained over a long period of time a 2°C rise even 
starts to break down the bodies’ vital organs. A 4°C rise is a medical emergency, technically known 
as “hyperpyrexia”. It requires immediate hospitalization to prevent a total collapse, and if untreated, 
death.  
