Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 220 
(BACK) 
 
Reflection Number Eleven 
The divorce between science and the senses 
 
As already extensively discussed in the previous chapter on Paradigm Shifts, there is a huge gulf 
between advanced science and our human senses. The first Biologist, Aristotle, spent some of his 
research time studying the mechanics of frogs’ legs. He will have used a sharp knife to cut open their 
bodies as he sat at his table somewhere near the waters of Pyrrha lagoon on the island of Lesbos.  
 
 
Today, there are biologists who can edit strings of DNA. The “CRISPR-Cas 9” (recognised by the 
Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 2020) is a breakthrough in genetic technology that is simply staggering. 
This is true both in terms of its remarkable precision and in its revolutionary potential. CRISPR acts 
like a GPS to locate some specific regions of a gene, and the Cas 9 Protein then acts like a pair of 
molecular scissors to cut the gene with astonishing accuracy.  
 
If we could zoom in on any one of our DNA, it would be evident that a gene holds coded information. 
Patterns that biologists have named with the four letters: A, C, G, and T. For a long time, it has been 
known that errors in these long nucleotide patterns can generate the wrong protein and trigger a 
disease. The problem was that we just did not have a pair of scissors small or sharp enough to do the 
editing.  
 
Now, remarkably, with CRISPR-Cas9, we have them.  
 
Therefore, after the identification of a mutant nucleotide we can now eliminate and then substitute 
them with the correct sequence. CRISPR is built to recognise and to heal a sequence with errors, 
before Cas 9 moves in to do the genetic surgery. Once in place, natural cellular correction systems 
can replicate the fix throughout the organism, and the doctor is able to say the word “cure” to the 
patient. 
 
CRISPR-Cas 9 has given humans the remarkable capacity to do genetic origami at a divine level. We 
now have the power to produce tomatoes that don’t rot, crops that could resist drought, or 
mosquitoes that are unable to spread malaria. Perhaps in the future we could ask the CRISPR-Cas 9 
to stitch together the correct coding for an extinct species. It could be as simple as A,B,C. Well, 
A,C,G,T.  
 
The progress of science into the insanely micro and the cosmically macro aspects of the universe 
should be celebrated as amazing feats of human ingenuity. However, the downside is that this gap 
between everyday sensory knowledge and the advanced abstraction of technical knowledge makes 
it very difficult to communicate some key truths about what we understand. It simply doesn’t matter 
how many props you throw at a Physicist who works in Quantum Mechanics, the realities of the sub-
atomic world can only really be captured in complex algebra.  
