Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 276 
(BACK) 
 
This background cultural alarm about the new stories embedded in the rocks of the Earth is evident 
in Tennyson’s poem:   
“So careful of the type?” but no. 
   From scarped cliff and quarried stone 
   She cries, “A thousand types are gone: 
I care for nothing, all shall go”. 
“O life as futile, then, as frail! 
   O for thy voice to soothe and bless! 
   What hope of answer, or redress? 
Behind the veil, behind the veil.” 
(Canto LVI)  
It was all very disorientating.  
Throughout Tennyson’s poem, the personal loss of meaning is resonant with the universal loss of 
meaning:  
“Be near me when my light is low, 
  
When the blood creeps, and the nerves prick 
  
And tingle; and the heart is sick, 
And all the wheels of being slow” 
(Canto L) 
“There rolls the deep where grew the tree. 
  
O earth, what changes hast thou seen! 
  
There where the long street roars, hath been 
The stillness of the central sea.” 
(Canto CXXIII) 
The Climate Academy programme explores the breathtaking truths of another geological period: The 
Anthropocene. Anyone with a proper systems view of the crisis will have to wrap their heads around 
some spectacular graphs, data and projections about future biomes, unrecognizable in many cases 
to the current world order.  
It is true that the new world that we are heading into is not a meadow, it is more like a minefield.  
In the 19th century, people had the comforting background belief that a kind God had constructed 
the world for humans. He had made it beautiful, ordered and predictable. If any natural disasters did 
happen, it was widely accepted that these were probably moments of justice for human error. A 
flood or draught would provoke questions of inner morality, they were not signs of a deeper chaos 
or inner instability in the universe.  
In the 20th century, although religious belief has faded, we still to retain the idea that the world is 
fundamentally stable. This is partly just an instinctive feature of human psychology, but it is also 
strengthened by the fact that technology has been so successful in domesticating life on earth to our 
own benefit.  
