Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 223 
(BACK) 
 
the game of what is being set up, we understand ourselves as impartial observers, whilst not 
realising that at a wider level we are drawn into those rules of engagement.  
 
It is no surprise that most political campaigns have the same background grammar as commercial 
adverts. Those who designed the successful Brexit political campaign did well to focus on verbs and 
adjectives that emphasised, freedom and choice. Most famously, “take back control” and “change 
politics for good”. Indeed, it is implausible to pretend that there is a clear divide between our social 
thinking and our economic thinking. The set of values which creates our political state is similar to 
the ones that fix the key signature of the commercial state. No politician or CEO can afford to be 
tone deaf about these things; the dissonances would be as painful as the ones you can hear in this 
frivolous bit of music by Tim Minchin: “F Sharp”.     
 
You don’t need to be a Marxist to notice how “the ruling ideas of any epoch are always the ideas of 
the ruling class”.307 The psychology of values explored here are not too many steps away from 
simple common sense.  
  
In conclusion, this reflection is not written to undermine the importance of freedom and choice. 
Nobody with an ounce of humanity in them would want to endorse a social regime in which 
essential human freedoms and rights were suppressed or obliterated. It should go without saying 
that the prominent features of a capitalist society -  ‘self-fulfilment’, ‘pleasure’, ‘freedom’ and 
‘choice -’ are wonderful things in themselves. It is just that when they become the invisible, 
unquestionable dogmas of a culture then it is important to recognise them as such. It is a vital step in 
an open and critical society to bring key assumptions to the surface.  
 
Also, it would be a clumsy exaggeration to assert here the values of freedom and choice function to 
the exclusion of other values. But perhaps, the continual background effect of these capitalist virtues 
does make it harder for other values to hold their place. They are amped up to such a high, restless 
level in our culture, it can make it difficult to sustain a different set of principles.  
 
A different grammar of life 
 
In quieter moments we can understand that being plugged into the imperatives of accelerated 
growth and consumption creates a society in which individuals feels alienated from themselves and 
from others. The modern world can provide a real buzz, but it can also create a default drone of 
restlessness.  
 
Hasn’t the prevalence of choice brought with it an equally prevalent FOMO?308 Does over-
consumption not lead to apathy and cynicism? Do we not crave beauty over banality? Do limits not 
sometimes bring us to an understanding of what is of real worth?  
 
 
 
 
307 From ‘The German Ideology’ (written in 1846). Karl Marx labelled the social values of an age as the 
“Superstructure”, and these would arise from what he termed the economic “Base”. He understood that it was 
one way traffic, from the Base up to the Superstructure; or in other words, from the material to the mental. He 
thought that the relationship between the two was natural, or inevitable – Marx did not think that the ruling 
class operated like some kind of Wizard of Oz behind the scenes.   
308 FOMO: Fear of Missing Out. This anxiety arises from the apprehension that you might be missing out on 
important information, moments, events, opportunities, of life experiences. This state of mind has been 
amplified with the growth of social media, which has dramatically increased our connectivity and opportunities 
to engage – and thereby, also, a huge flow of things that are also impossible to keep pace with.   
