Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 335 
(BACK) 
 
We can take this Geometrical game one final step further.  
In his book Timaeus, Plato imagines God using a regular dodecahedron to 
“arrange the whole constellation of the heavens”.423 424 We might impishly 
understand this to be like a divine being going around with some kind of 
gingerbread cutter, having fun with the basic material of the universe. Yet, 
modern theoretical Physicists could be understood as an attempt to 
retrace this divine being’s steps. Divine being or no divine being, the 
universe seems to enjoy a basic order and stability.   
It is not necessary to believe in a God to appreciate the inner coherence of 
the universe - just like an archway can be constructed without a keystone. 
Modern atheists would insist that random chance, given enough time, 
would be able to bring about order at both a cosmic and biological level. 
Atheists might even snigger at the notion of a divine being going around, imprinting the world with 
some kind of geometrical biscuit cutter.  
But for Platonists, the concept of God is a beautiful capstone that provides the rest of his thinking 
with a completeness and coherence. There was no disconnect for Plato between questions about 
the material world, and questions about value and purpose. The physical universe was an expression 
of a deeper divine order. Therefore, it is not a surprise to find that Plato thought that issues of 
beauty and justice would also be informed by the features of the Geometric world: Order, balance, 
coherence, harmony, patterns and symmetries.  
Again, this might seem like an odd worldview. However, his ideas are not that far away from our 
common sense.  
Great art and music are not soups of colours or sounds. There is beauty in how an artist or composer 
gives shape to things. A canvas of random blobs, and symphony of random noise will not hold our 
attention for long.425 A Vermeer portrait prompts us to appreciate simplicity and poise, and the 
measured tones of a Bach concerto can calm a troubled heart.   
Likewise, common sense morality is informed by geometric language. We speak about a balanced 
fair share; we might praise someone for being even handed. We might protest for equality or seek to 
find an inner equilibrium in life.  
And so on.  
Plato set up his Academy in pursuit of the truth and reality because he thought that there was 
something to find. He was willing to wrestle with all the diverse elements of life because he thought 
that there was something to fight with.   
 
 
423 ‘Timaeus’, lines 1317-1318.  
424 This geometrical solid was not picked out by Plato by chance. It is one of an exclusive club of 5 solids whose 
faces are all identical, regular polygons that meet at the same three-dimensional angles. These 5 solids are 
known to us now as The Platonic Solids.  
 
425 20th century art and music pushed (and transcended?) the limits of how much chaos could be artistically 
framed. Through artists like Jackson Pollock and composers like John Cage, for example.   
Figure 58, Dodecahedron. 
Creative Commons 3.0 
AndrewKepert at English 
Wikipedia 
