Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 47 
(BACK) 
 
 
 
MAIN TEXT 
Mining Deeper 
 
 
Professor Al Barlett’s point about population growth is part of a talk that he gave 1,742 times over 
36 years at universities and institutions all over the world. It can be found on YouTube under the 
title, “The most IMPORTANT video you will ever see”. This might sound a little overstated, but this 
module will show that Al Barlett was definitely on to something critical.  
 
So far, this module has been limited to two simple co-ordinates: land and population. This simplicity 
is important because it is surprisingly difficult to remember the fact that we are in a closed space. 
However, it would not be worth setting up a whole module to establish this simple point if there 
were not further important implications that flow from this fact.  
 
The consequences of living in a closed mass system really gets interesting when you push the Physics 
a bit harder.  
 
Closed Mass System 
 
If you were to look up “closed mass systems” you would almost certainly find yourself on a webpage 
devoted to Physics, or more specifically, The Second Law of Thermodynamics. If you can feel your 
brain going into shutdown mode, just hold on for a few more paragraphs because the consequences 
of living in a closed mass system are not trivial. And with the help of the spaceship image, there are a 
number of truths that can be understood in a simple way. Fortunately, you don’t always need a PhD 
in Theoretical Physics to have your mind melted.   
 
In a classroom, the answer to the question, “Where does gold come from?” is normally answered 
with the words, “a mine”. If a class of students is pushed for more answers, then they often say, “a 
river”, or “a shop”; the more inventive say, “a bank” or once, “my mum’s jewellery box”. But these 
answers are not deep enough. “Where does all the gold on the planet actually come from?  Before 
the mine?” Very few students know the answer to that.  
 
The answer is rather cosmic. The answer is: a supernova. All the gold on the planet was forged in the 
unique conditions of a supernova. These conditions cannot be replicated. Jamie Oliver can make 
cooking look easy, but even this is beyond him. He would need an oven of the most unimaginable 
power and pressure.  
 
A supernova happens when a massive star collapses64. Our Sun is much too small and puny for this; 
you need really a major star to fold in on itself. At the beginning of this process, the Hydrogen 
reserves of the star are burnt at a phenomenal rate, but this massive energy release stops once it is 
exhausted. During stage two of this process the temperature is 100 billion degrees Celsius, and the 
burning of Helium reserves now causes the production of carbon and oxygen. Brian Cox notes, 
 
64 Current  modelling of supernovas outlines two main triggers for this: either a compact star (like a White 
Dwarf) has its nuclear fusion button re-triggered, or the core of a massive star suddenly collapses under 
gravity.  Either way, it makes a one hell of a bang.  
