Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 128 
(BACK) 
 
What is missing so far is a robust frame of reference.  
 
The Right to Know 
 
There simply must be an accountable, realistic, science-based plan.   
Every nation of the world has signed up to the Paris Agreement. This agreement is a commitment 
“to limit global warming to well below 2, preferably to 1.5 degrees Celsius, compared to pre-
industrial levels.”208 It only seems fair to assume that the signatories of the document actually meant 
it. It only seems reasonable to take the Paris Agreement at face-value.  
Where is the transparency then?  
A transparency, not only to measure our failings, but also to affirm, with genuine depth, those 
moments when a major step forward is taken. Any Party to the UN Climate Treaty, every nation that 
sets a target, would be expected to have a clear, accountable method of measuring the progress 
made. They should have the chance to have their efforts and achievements applauded and be held 
responsible for failures. This is especially true in a democratic state Indeed, many of the signatories 
of the Paris Agreement are from the world’s most celebrated democracies; and the UN itself is an 
institution which upholds the value of democratic rights.  
The numbers of the CUTx Index could not be simpler. They provide a clear and direct measure of 
what is going on above our heads. No citizen should have the burden of completing a PhD in Physics 
to understand what will happen to the basic stability of all the living systems of the planet in the 
next few years. All the CUTx Index does is take the remaining carbon budget defined by the most 
authoritative science body on climate change, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and 
divide that budget equally between every inhabitant of the planet. There are no weird accountancy 
tricks, no vested interests amplified, and no minority interests diminished. The index is simply the 
product of scientific exactitude and the established United Nations principles of equity, and different 
capabilities and responsibilities. 
In an age where information is so often weaponised or withheld for profit, the numbers of the CUTx 
index are different. They have no commercial background; they do not come from any slanted 
governmental agenda. Like Socrates, in the famous painting by Jacques-Louis David, they simply 
point to the truth.  
 
 
208 https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/the-paris-agreement/the-paris-agreement 
