Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 278 
(BACK) 
 
self to find realities beyond the self… these are all restorative, regenerative moves for young people 
with ecological anxiety to take.  
In the usual ABAB format, the earlier Romantic poet William Blake, penned these beautiful lines:  
“To see a world in a grain of sand, 
And heaven in a wild flower, 
Hold infinity in the palm of your hand, 
And eternity in an hour.” 
 opening lines, “Auguries of Innocence”, 1803.  
We might have evolved from lower life forms, but we find ourselves in this tiny slice of Earth time as 
creatures that crave purpose and value. We are creatures with an astonishing capacity for reflection 
and insight. A real engagement in advancing climate awareness and extending the fight for justice 
might not lead to tangible results, however, there is something properly, authentically human about 
the effort. And there is something properly, wonderfully human in not being productive at all. Poetry 
slows us down. It is about finding resonance and quality, it is about finding the depth in small things.   
Ultimately, just as tears seem to have the weird mystical ability to cleanse the soul, engaging with 
artistic works of poetry, music, or literature can have a wonderfully cathartic effect.374 It is like 
having a good cry.  
Perhaps, in an echo of Tennyson’s last line: 
Tis’ better to have lived and learnt, than never to have learnt at all.  
 
 
 
Bridge to Kafka  
 
Tennyson was one of the last Romantic poets. This is evident in certain features of his poem. 
Namely, the sense of loss and disorientation that Tennyson is talking through with himself has the 
natural world as a backdrop. His lyrical lines are melancholic, and his stretching of the rules of poetic 
verse are typical of the foregrounding of human emotion – as more valuable than reason, standards 
and customs.  
Kafka, was a novelist of modernity. He was an urban man. Instead of the cuckoo, we have just the 
clocks. Instead of the dale, there is the desk. Instead of the seasons, human life dominated by 
timetables, quotas and deadlines. Instead of pushing against the wind and rain, his characters have 
to grapple with the blind forces of bureaucracy, meaningless procedures and absurdly passive 
people. Instead of clouds over head, there are impenetrable fogs of meaning and purpose. 
If Tennyson can help us find inner strength in our grief for the loss of a natural world, Kafka is going 
to help us put words on the dizzying frustrations of modern life. For all those moments when we 
 
374 It was Plato’s student, Aristotle who wrote directly about the cathartic power of art. His work, ‘Poetics’ 
(c335BCE) remains a major text for those seeking to harness such powers in the arts.  
