Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 164 
(BACK) 
 
The Flickering 
It is lonely, being fully engaged in climate activism.  
You live like an alien in a paradigm of values and ambitions which make little sense to you. Your 
attempts to articulate both your aspirations and anxieties often seem doomed to fail. When you 
speak about the dangers of systemic collapse, somehow people do not have the imagination to 
understand what you are saying. When you speak about the riches of an economy for the common 
good it often leads to blank looks. Your vision of the future is dismissed as unrealistic, when at the 
same time those who are satisfied with a tinkering of the status quo don’t realise how profoundly 
unrealistic the current reality is.  
There are so many people around you who “Don’t Look Up”. You live in the same world as everyone 
else, yet the whole thing is somehow, oddly, skewed. It is incomprehensible why decisive action is 
not taken to protect us from an existential threat. There is something Kafkaesque about the lethargy 
and zombie like reactions of public figures, media coverage and, worst of all, sometimes those who 
are close to you.  
The good news is that a time of radical change is ahead. The good news is that you are not alone.  
This textbook is not going to naïvely and bluntly assert that a miracle is around the corner, but there 
is a flickering that is happening with increasing intensity. Both a flickering output of the old paradigm 
and a flickering light that provides glimpses of what the new paradigm will look like.  
The dark truth is that natural tipping points might push us into a new paradigm chaotically. The laws 
of thermodynamics written into the fabric of the universe might take us over the threshold of 
unstoppable transformation first.  However, the bright truth is that there are also tipping points in 
social systems too. We build up to them slowly, but once they lock into a shift towards a new 
paradigm, the energy and momentum are unstoppable. And to return one last time to the 
Copernican Revolution, it might seem a bit unnecessary to say it, but the reason why the Physics of 
Copernicus and Galileo became standard was because it was the truth. It was as simple as that.  
What could be simpler today than recognising the physical limits of our Earth? It should be blindingly 
obvious from any photograph taken of the planet from outer space. It has a circumference. What 
could be plainer than the truth that the Earth’s biosphere cannot tolerate a ‘hyperpyrexia’ of 4°C 
heating? Anyone with the memory of a fever should have no problem imagining the suffering and 
failures such a knackered state would cause.  
Those who understand the sort of paradigm shift that must happen, those who “get it”, can afford to 
be confident and courageous - because the recklessness of the status quo and the advantages to be 
gained by a transformation to a sustainable society are so obvious. Once the truth about the crisis 
has been seen in its systemic fullness, it cannot be unseen. Future generations will look with 
incredulity at the stalling ignorance that held us back from the systemic changes required.  
More. The transformation of societies into ones that are compatible with the laws of physics and 
chemistry will have to be far more beautiful, healthier, collaborative, and just.  
What is not to like?  
