Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 344 
(BACK) 
 
Pillar Two 
Civic Engagement 
 
From Geometry to Justice  
Looking at the original site of 
Academia today, what can be 
seen are the foundational stones 
that are left after hundreds of 
years of change.  
The brief meditation on 
Geometry and the basic details 
of ‘The Divided Line’ were an 
attempt to lay bare the basic 
expectations of Plato’s school.  
However, we now need to build 
on these stones, like Plato 
himself did. There was no point 
in building a school out in the 
outskirts of Athens simply to 
think. It was one thing to 
develop a systemic 
understanding of reality, it was quite another to actively do something with that knowledge. The 
clichés about absent minded, aloof philosophers must be left at the door.   
Plato did not establish his school of thought simply to understand the world. His intention was to 
change it.  
This chapter will progress from the mind to the body. From a systemic understanding to systemically 
informed engagement in the civic body.   
This civic engagement is important to stress because the word ‘academia’ today strongly infers a 
world of detached reflection. This is far from the original impulse and intention of Plato when he set 
everything up. His passion for critical thinking and his determination to find a clear vantage point on 
the world, was informed by a deep commitment to justice – in the real world around him. It is 
difficult for us to make a strong connection now between the mind of the academic and the body of 
the civic society they serve. The gap between experts and society is often made to look like a very 
wide one, especially by those with a popularist political agenda.  
However, in the case of Plato these two things simply must not be detached.  
 
The person that inspired Plato to set up The Academy was his teacher, Socrates.  
This is where this section will start. And for this, we need to leave Academia and go back down into 
the city.  
Figure 59, Plato's Academy Archaeological Site in Akadimia Platonos 
subdivision of Athens, Greece.Tomisti, Creative Commons 3.0 
