Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 153 
(BACK) 
 
about whether the Sun was in the middle of the Solar System, whilst it was true that his theory had 
explained the orbits of the planets and the procession of the equinoxes, there was a little glitch. 
Actually it was quite a big glitch – it was a problem the size of a planet: Uranus.   
Uranus (careful how you pronounce it) had been displaying irregular movements. The observations 
of Uranus repeatedly and stubbornly refused to fit the predictions of Newtonian mechanics. 
Recordings and calculations were checked again and again, but the numbers just did not add up. The 
odd results were a big problem, because Newton’s laws were universal. They could not fade, wobble 
or distort just because something was a very long way away; they could not be right everywhere else 
in the universe, but just not correct with Uranus.   
What to do then? There was not really any choice. Astronomers had to double down on the Physics, 
they had to be resolute. Despite all the data, they defiantly held on to Newton’s laws and 
predications… and by stubbornly insisting that Newton was right, a wonderful new discovery was 
made.  
The glitches in the data could be resolved if the astronomers postulated another planet, further out 
in the Solar System; a planet that could be interfering with Uranus’ orbital pathway. And that is 
precisely what Urbain Le Verrier did in 1846. With this abstract addition to the Solar System, the 
quickening and the drag observed in Uranus could be understood, as it moved in and out of that 
gravitational field of this new hypothetical planet. The location, size and speed of this abstract thing 
could reconcile all the glitches in the observational data of Uranus. 
On receiving the papers of Le Verrier’s cosmic calculations, it only took the German astronomer 
Galle a few hours to set up a telescope in the right direction. And so, on 23rd  September  1846, just 
before midnight, this actual new object was observed for the first time within 1° of its predicted 
position.  
We call this large object: Neptune.  
It was a dramatic moment in the history of science. The scientists were rewarded for their patience. 
Like a relationship that overcomes its difficulties, the fundamental beliefs were powerfully affirmed. 
• 
When have you doubted yourself, but then seen your strengths come through?  
o What do you think your main strengths are?  
o What aspects of your character or skills do you still wonder about?  
• 
The Ancient Greeks thought that our greatest strengths are also our weaknesses, do you 
agree?  
• 
What tough tests lie ahead or behind you?  
• 
What other revolutions t happened in Physics, either before or after Newton?  
o When these revolutions happened, did they completely destroy the former system 
of belief?  
