Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 76 
(BACK) 
 
Then 1932 happened. A massive, abrupt zag backwards happened. 
 
The distressed democracy in Germany effectively voted into power the most sadistic and serious 
threat to open government and human rights that the modern world has ever faced. Adolf Hitler’s 
dictatorship took the threat to civilised life to a profoundly obscene and global level.  
 
In what seemed like the ultimate test of human nature between 1939 and 1945, the Allied powers 
battled against the Axis powers. The dark energies of fear, hate and division were rallied together for 
a most brutal assault on human dignity. We emerged from World War II with deep wounds and 
scars.  
 
 We also emerged, however, with genuine strength and conviction. The global affirmation of human 
rights, democracy and freedom that was declared by the establishment of the United Nations in 
1945 was an emphatic statement of intent for the future. There was a definitive resolve to make the 
UN a concluding moment in the history of human conflict.  
 
Democracy will always be a fragile experiment, it will always be prone to failures, and spasms of 
violence, because it is rooted in human beings who are full of the most remarkable contradictions. 
We are capable of the most lofty selflessness and yet we can behave with such atrocious negligence 
and recklessness. We should not be timid about our greatest values, and we should not be shy about 
facing our dark side too.   
 
The modern United Nations is a wonderfully ambitious project that seeks to protect and strengthen 
the space above our heads. It is constantly wrestling with all the contradictory forces of the human 
condition. Even at its birth, the opening declarations of the UN were asserted by nation states that 
hardly embodied the values they were pointing to116.  
 
All the binding commitments to peace embodied in the UN treaties were signed in the aftermath of 
a traumatic existential crisis. All the institutional apparatus of the UN was set up with a deep 
understanding of how damaging it can be when that space turns toxic.  
 
 
 
116 Most notably the USSR under Stalin was a founding member of the UN in 1945. Their 27 million war dead in 
World War II outstripped any other nation by miles. Yet, Roosevelt knew about some of the human rights 
abuses carried out under Stalin (such as the Katyn Massacre in Poland in 1940) and his totalitarian regime. 
However, it was essential to have the USSR in the tent, not out of it. Indeed, it was given a seat in the UN 
Security Council.  
