Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 180 
(BACK) 
 
For example, the BBC 6pm “News Tonight” programme (17th January  2022) ran a short feature271 to 
explain what an average temperature rise of 4°C would look like for the United Kingdom: 
“Infrastructure: roads, sewage systems, power stations will struggle as storms, draughts, floods and 
heatwaves become more frequent and intense. How health and productivity will suffer, farms will 
struggle to produce as much food, and the supply of food from abroad is likely to be disrupted. … 
But the good news is that today’s report finds that investing and protecting the country from climate 
change is good value, with every pound invested delivering up to 10 times that in economic benefits. 
But we all need to begin to make these investments now to be ready for the coming storms. Justin 
Rowlett, BBC News”.  
Compared to the mainstream scientific consensus, this ‘Overton Window’ is pushed far away to the 
side, towards the idea that the impacts of climate change are neutral.  Sometimes this box is called 
the ‘Discourse Window’, because it describes the width of a debate that is permitted for any political 
issue.  
A more detailed view of this window looks like this:  
 
More Freedom   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Less Freedom  
 
Thinking more widely than the climate crisis for a moment, in the 18th century, a vote for all women 
would have been an unthinkable policy. Likewise, the abolition of slavery would have been 
unthinkable for some and radical for most. Now they are both considered as commonsense policies.  
Moves like this along the Overton window can take centuries, but sometimes the cultural shift is 
very sudden. For example, who would have thought that LGBTQ+ rights272 would have shifted so 
dramatically in the last few years? The intransigence over LGBTQ+ seemed so webbed into some 
general cultural assumptions about what was ‘natural’ or not. The taboos were so imposing, and 
there were so few signals that major change could occur for so long. Yet, in the end, the media shift 
in attitude happened, and the new framing of the issue swiftly cascaded into most levels of society.   
Even more rapidly, after the Fukushima disaster in 2011, there was a dramatic swing in public 
perception against the merits of nuclear power. This did not only occur in Japan. Germany suddenly 
decommissioned its nuclear power stations (and much of the energy gap was regrettably taken up 
by coal).273    
In the chart there is a small bump entitled, “Right-wing think tanks”. Even though it has nothing at all 
to do with science, it has been very influential in pulling public discourse away from reality. These 
think tanks have flooded the media with content and messages that just function as a fake news 
distraction. The most notable example of this has been the influence of the ‘Kochtypus’Kochtopus’, a 
massive sprawling network of manipulative power headed by the billionaire brothers Koch. The 
tentacles of their investments extend into so many areas of the United States’ cultural and political 
 
271 The feature was in response to the publication on that day of the “UK Climate Change Risk Assessment 
2022”.  
272 And all the different variations on that base. 
273 There are many different data sources to confirm this, but perhaps it is most informative to note that 
despite its reputation as a modern economy, coal was Germany’s primary energy source in 2021. 
https://www.destatis.de/EN/Press/2021/09/PE21_429_43312.html 
