Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 274 
(BACK) 
 
The whole work sustains a bulging tension between structure and shape on the one hand, and the 
traumatic, chaotic content that it is dealing with on the other. The stitches of order are starting to 
come loose, even though Tennyson is just about holding things together.368  
b) The cultural  
In 1677, Robert Plot, an Oxford Professor, published his work, “Natural History of Oxford-shire” in 
which he describes the discovery of a massive bone, “I have one dug out of a quarry in the Parish of 
Cornwell… that has exactly the Figure of the lowermost part of the Thigh-Bone of a Man or at least 
of some other Animal”.369  
‘The learned Dr Plot’ (as he was known), toyed with the idea that it could have been an imported 
elephant bone from Roman times, but finally settled on the idea that it must have just been a 
massive human being.  
Gulp. 
The word he was looking for was ‘Megalosaurus’. However, because he was living long before we 
came to understand the “deep time” of the Earth, not only did he not have the vocabulary, he did 
not even have the conceptual framework to understand what he was looking at. 
In fact, the first scientifically recorded example of a dinosaur bone is 
that of a Megalosaurus, by the fossil hunter William Buckland in 
1824. But even he could not really see the true dimensions of what 
he was describing, he thought it belong to a more ancient type of 
giant lizard. The word “dinosaur” and the whole magical world of 
understanding that goes with it only became real with the work of Sir 
Richard Owen. He coined the word dinosaur in 1842, a word that 
literally means “terrible lizard” from the Greek 
“δεινός” (deinos,"terrible, powerful, wondrous"). What that singular 
word does is embody the recognition of an entirely distinct form of 
life, in a fundamentally different world.      
A whole alternative reality had existed on Earth.  
Yet, now through the imagination and determined work of scientists, 
it had jumped back into life. Suddenly, an utterly different domain 
opened up. Things had been profoundly different. Such a shocking 
scientific breakthrough brought back into existence, not only a whole 
park of Jurassic creatures from the past, but also an entirely different 
set of vocabulary and a radically different way to look at the Planet.    
 
368 Within a few decades of “In Memorium”, western culture will hit modernity. In the 20th century, the 
wheels will come off. World War One will pulverise any confidence in stability and progress. TS Elliot will depict 
“The Waste Land” (1922) of meaning, through kaleidoscopic symbols and voices. In modernity, there will only 
be flickers of meaning and flashes of narrative direction. Toilet urinals will be art (Duchamp, 1917), 4mins 33 of 
silence will be music (Cage, 1952) and two blokes, hanging around “Waiting for Godo” by a tree will be theatre 
(Beckett, 1953).  
 
369 (Plot, 1677, p. 132). 
Figure 49, "Pelorosaurus", National 
History Museum, London. 
