Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 121 
(BACK) 
 
MAIN TEXT 
 
The Numbers 
 
The CUTx Index 
The numbers of the CUTx Index assume some very basic things:  
1. There is only one atmosphere.  
2. Greenhouse gases disperse equally in the atmosphere. 
3. The atmosphere should be shared equally by all humans;198 
4. The index starts from the total remaining carbon budget that would limit warming to 1.5°C or 
2°C199; 
5. This budget is then divided per capita (on the basis of points 1-3). 
Each national number is calculated in the following way:  
1. These budgets do not include unproven negative emissions to be achieved by technology 
that does not yet exist.  
2. They do not include the possibility of overshooting the targets and then dragging the 
concentrations back to a safe level at a later date.  
3. Each nation is apportioned their fair share of the budget (multiply the per capita budget by 
the size of the population); 
4. Calculate how current national emissions from the consumption of goods and services must 
be changed to remain within their fair share of the carbon budget. 
5. The required changes are given in percentage / per year from the current level of emissions.  
This percentage is to be achieved in the year starting from now and repeated each year.  
To be noted:  
1. The final numbers include the latest updates to how we understand Earth System sensitivity 
to greenhouse gas emissions. 
2. The final numbers are based on the latest data and the conclusions of the best science 
available in 2022 (Sixth Assessment of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change).  
3. The final numbers have been calculated by the Only One Earth Science initiative,200 which is 
reviewed and supported for public communication by IPCC Co-Chairs Dr Valérie Masson 
 
198 See the ‘One Atmosphere Equal Rights’ initiative, administered by Homo Sapiens Foundation, supported by 
many eminent scientists from every nation and discipline, including Nobel Prize winners 
(OnlyOneEarth.Science). 
199 IPCC AR6 WG1 best chance budget to hold waring to 1.5C and 2C (a probability of 83%), updated to 2022 
200 UN Only one Earth science is considered “an important contribution to the UN 75th Anniversary Initiative”,* 
public communication of which is supported by Dr Jian Liu, Chief Scientist UNEP, Dr Pavel Kabat, Chief Scientist 
WMO, Dr Soumya Swaminathan, Chief Scientist WHO, Dr Youba Sokona, Vice Chair IPCC, Dr Shamila Nair-
Bedouelle, Director General Science UNESCO, Dr Guido Schmidt-Traub, Executive Director UNSDSN, Dr 
Elizabeth Mrema, Executive Secretary CBD, Dr Stefan Swartling Peterson, Director Health UNICEF among many 
others. * Fabrizio Hochschild, UN Technology Envoy, UN 75th Anniversary Special Advisor. 
 
