Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 36 
(BACK) 
 
Main Text 
 
The Anthropocene 
 
 
The term, “Anthropocene” comes from two Greek words: Anthropos (ἄνθρωπος) meaning “man” 
and “-cene” from kainos (καινός) meaning “new” or “recent”. It is no small achievement to have a 
geological epoch named after you. The systemic effects of resource extraction (biomass in particular) 
and greenhouse gas emissions are the core reasons for geologists to consider getting their pens out 
to draw a new line in planetary time for the first time in 11,700 years.40  
 
In the short time available here to throw a little light on the situation, attention will be given to the 
three most prominent features that future geologists will find characterise the Anthropocene:  
 
a) Resource extractions (in particular biomass) 
b) Mass extinction  
c) Nuclear deposits 
 
It is the first and second features of the Anthropocene, that deserve our attention - even if their 
stealth-like threat, off the radar of our attention, are a potent threat to human development. And 
for completeness, a bit of space should be given to nuclear power as its sheer power cannot be 
ignored in any account of the Anthropocene. 
 
Opening up these two risks is not a distraction. Climate change will rightly remain the central 
concern throughout this book, and for the Academy, because it is the most acute crisis of the 
Anthropocene. Climate change grabs the headlines for good reason.  
 
However, it is not the only threat to human civilisation and an understanding of the bigger picture of 
sustainability is essential: firstly, because all these problems are all interconnected. Secondly, 
because climate change is rooted in these two issues.  
 
a) Resource extractions 
 
The most important feature of the Anthropocene is our rampant extraction of resources.  
 
We have converted about two fifths of the Earth’s land surface to serve the demands of our food 
production41, and we take one quarter of all  that plants produce in a year42. In addition, we have 
dug out thousands of mines and quarries all over the face of the Earth. This resource extraction and 
consumption is responsible for 90% of all biodiversity loss43.  
 
 
40 ://www.britannica.com/science/Anthropocene-Epoch 
41 Faostat Land Use (https://www.fao.org/faostat/en/#data/RL)  
42 https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/13/15/8606/htm 
43 United Nations Environment International Resource Panel. Natural Resources for the Future We Want. Key 
fact: “90% of biodiversity loss is caused by extraction and processing (consumption) of natural resources” 
(2019). 
