Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 269 
(BACK) 
 
In The Climate Academy programme, we label the first step “Systems Understanding”, and the 
second step of ownership, “Civic Engagement”. From the outside it might seem that the first is about 
the head, the second is about the heart. The reality is that understanding requires an open heart, 
and engagement in the world requires the guidance of reason.  
3. Bargaining  
There are certain things that are off limits in our thinking about the climate crisis. It appears as if we 
are only prepared to engage with the problem if it doesn’t challenge certain deeply entrenched 
beliefs.  
It is as if we were bargaining with the problem.  
We are so clumsily attached to the notion of GDP growth that we are unwilling to admit that human 
development could be so much richer and stronger in a world that is not fuelled by consumption and 
fossilized energy. This attachment to GDP is never justified, as the previous chapter has exposed. It is 
just an odd dogma that persists in our macro decision making. The result of this dogmatism is that 
we try to bargain with the laws of physics and chemistry by insisting that any investments in a 
genuinely green future must have some visible, short term market value.  
Likewise, the absurd dominance of individual actions as a solution to the crisis is another case of 
bargaining. It insists that the individual has to have the ultimate control. It refuses to admit that 
solutions can be found outside of individual choice and freedom. The absolutism of the individual as 
the primary political unit makes us blind to the fact that some things can only be achieved at 
collective, governmental level.  
This double mantra of growth and individual empowerment has blocked out our ability to think in 
proper systemic and holistic terms. It makes the global and ineffective commitment to “recycling” so 
tragically explicable: it is a unwillingness to let go. We need to retain our tactile control of the 
problem through small rituals, and we need to continue consumption (just with a dose of 
redemption at the end).  
Stepping outside of this cultural matrix requires courage. It is a step into a world that is much less 
familiar. There are no guarantees of success. However, like with overcoming grief, a new world of 
possibilities does open up.  
It is not that we drop the individual actions. All the typical environmental actions remain important 
parts of the solution. However, we move on. We take on new challenges, discover different parts of 
ourselves and trust that when we step forward, informed by deep human virtues and a commitment 
to what is real and true, something beautiful can emerge.  
In my own school and in almost every school that I have visited, there is a massively powerful centre 
of gravity that pulls student actions and awareness towards individual tactile actions. These 
initiatives and projects will always naturally arise because of human psychology and because of the 
dominant background culture. What do we have as a counterweight to this in schools? How can we 
affirm the value of all those individual actions yet at the same time point to the far greater power of 
the systemic change that is required?  
Schools are rightly concerned about ecoanxiety, but if we only speak to our students in limited, 
atomized ways when they are stuck behind a desk, we are not likely to help them. Admittedly, the 
greater depth provided by a proper understanding of the systems in play means that a student will 
have to confront some massive physical and social forces, perhaps for the first time.  
