Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 193 
(BACK) 
 
Going over 400ppm 
On October 24th, 2016, the CO2 level had rested for a year above the 400ppm threshold for the first 
time in millions of years. However, the crossing of this truly historic threshold did not make it onto 
the front pages of the newspapers, nor did it get into the schedules of most TV news shows that day. 
TF1 in France preferred, for example, to spend around seven minutes during their prime-time 
evening news slot discussing a national online survey about whether wearing a sweater to the office 
was really acceptable in the modern workplace. 
Although this remarkable climate change news was reported on the front page of the BBC website at 
the start of the day, it had sunk down to within the ‘Science’ section by the evening. It was not 
supported by enough clicks to ensure its survival and had been overtaken by more popular stories. 
The ‘Most Read’ page that day concerned a Northern Irish court case about a ‘Gay Cake’, followed by 
other big news such Justin Bieber’s sudden stage exit in Manchester, and England’s 22 run win over 
Bangladesh in the cricket. 
You would think that it mattered more than that. 
You would think that we would really be listening very intently. 
The concentrations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere have reached such a high level that the 
entire functioning of human civilisation is at risk. The climate matters a lot. Like, really a lot. In any 
normal kind of universe, we would be listening. Any sane society would be tuned in with unswerving 
focus on the latest figures. 
A reading of (now well over) 400ppm matters. 
It is obvious that nobody could survive a 10 minute bath in boiling water, no matter how many 
relaxing Body Shop products there were in it. Likewise, it is clear that nobody can survive an internal 
body temperature that is elevated over 4°C for more than a few hours.  
The reading of over 400ppm signals that human civilisation is on a fast-track to raised global average 
temperatures, with fatal effects.  
