Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 304 
(BACK) 
 
The phrase coined by the philosopher Hannah Arendt, is illuminating. She would have called the slick 
green washed policies of recent decades, “organized lying”. A very powerful concept that deserves 
more attention than can be afforded to it here.394  
 
 
Distracted, we have allowed our democratic ship to sail into threatening unchartered waters. Our 
modern, advanced societies have got into the habit of not dealing with reality. We have been side-
tracked by the pastry chef on board and have grown inattentive to the doctor. In fact, the climate 
crisis is so far advanced that scientists and other very normal people have started to glue themselves 
to buildings in an attempt to have their concerns about the collapse of human civilisation 
recognised. Something is evidently not right if citizens have to resort to volunteering for arrest just 
to establish some points of common sense.  
Just to be clear. This is not even about the collapse of one civilization, this is about the potential 
outcome of causing the breakdown of the global system, and pushing countless cultures, 
communities and nations off the chart.  
We are surrounded by ecological tipping points and the route to safer waters requires us to tack 
against some strong headwinds.  
Plato foresaw the kind of trouble that a loose mind-set to the truth would bring. Furthermore, he 
thought that this casual attitude would be exaggerated in a democracy. Plato writes these striking 
words: “Then, summing up all of these things together,” I said, “do you notice how soft they make 
the citizens’ soul, so that if someone proposes anything that smacks in any way of slavery, they are 
irritated and can’t stand it? And they end up, as you well know, by paying no attention to the laws, 
written or unwritten, in order that they may avoid having any master at all.” (563d). 
 
 
 
394 See “Arendt Tackles Climate Change” (2024) for the fuller picture.  
