Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 137 
(BACK) 
 
mathematics. Indeed, when these scientists started their research into climate modelling back in the 
1970s, the sheer scale and the chaotic character of their subject meant that even some of their 
academic colleagues viewed their work with a dose of scepticism, and held some of their papers at 
arms-length214.  
Like any science, climate scenario modelling papers are carefully wrapped in different layers of 
probability. Any conclusions are put forward with due modesty and tentativeness; the rules of peer 
reviewed scientific publications are rightly stringent and exacting.  
Despite these formidable obstacles, this branch of Physics now speaks with genuine authority. It is 
also an area of science that has been given a fantastic boost by the exponential rise in computer 
processing power since the 1970s. Indeed, the Nobel committee awarded Syukuro Manabe, Klaus 
Hasselmann and Giorgio Parisi215 with the joint Physics Prize in 2021 in recognition of the robust and 
groundbreaking nature of their work.  
In fact, climate science is just like any other scientific discipline – the central conclusions are 
extremely secure. As former NASA scientist Professor James Hansen, “We know as much about the 
climate as we do about the human body”.216 217 
For example, in Biology we all know that continually overeating will lead to obesity, which in turn 
leads to an increased probability of fatal diseases. This most basic fact of anatomy is not then 
dismissed if our doctor is not able to predict which biscuit, on what day, will lead to a heart attack, at 
a precise moment in the future. Likewise, we don’t need a PhD in Physics to know that jumping off a 
motorway bridge into a busy traffic will prove to be fatal.  We would not know what gender of 
driver, nor which model and colour of vehicle will hit us. However, it is clear that our life expectancy 
will shrink to seconds if this idea was to become a commitment.  
In conclusion, there are some clear lines that we should not cross over if we want to avoid triggering 
a cascading sequence of events that will throw the major forces of the planet into a chaotic condition.  
These lines are well understood.  
A glance back at ‘The Absolute Basics’ will also show that a reading of 413ppm for the concentration 
of Carbon Dioxide particles in the dry air is profoundly unprecedented. As Peteri Talaas, the former 
Director General of the WMO stated in October 2021, “The last time the Earth experienced a 
comparable concentration of CO2 was 3-5 million years ago, the temperature was 2-3°C warmer and 
sea level was 10-20 meters higher than now. But there were not 7.8 billion people then”.218 It is simply 
not possible to shunt up the level of extra watts in the Earth’s planetary systems so abruptly and so 
decisively and not expect a major reaction somewhere down the line. It is naïve to think that a 
balanced equilibrium could remain in place when the fundamental co-ordinate of all life on Earth has 
just jumped far outside of its background pattern of movement. The last time anyone checked the 
global ‘Wise-o-meter’, we were still getting a painfully low climate score.  
It is not an exaggeration to state that climate scientists are looking at all the hockey-stick graphs 
through the gaps in their fingers, as they understand the jeopardy of the current situation.  
 
214 Use Nicolas’ example.  
215 Parisi was awarded half the prize, with Manade and Hasselmann awarded the other half.  
216 “Merchants of Doubt” (20**) documentary.  
217 Indeed, Professor Hansen’s groundbreaking research into climate modelling and commitment to climate 
justice deserves special note, even if the Nobel Prize committee has so far looked past him.    
218 https://public.wmo.int/en/media/press-release/greenhouse-gas-bulletin-another-year-another-record 
