Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 75 
(BACK) 
 
  
MAIN TEXT 
 
The Space Above Our Heads  
Part One 
 
 
The United Nations 
 
This chapter is about the space above our heads.  
 
It is about the importance of that democratic space. More specifically, it will underline the 
importance of protecting it, and help us think more clearly about it.  
 
On the second floor of the UNHQ in New York there 
is an ancient barrel114, covered with cuneiform 
indentations of text. Dated to 539BC, it was 
originally published by Cyrus the Great after he had 
defeated the Babylonian Empire. The text praises 
the Persian King for liberating thousands of people 
from their captivity in Babylon, and allowing them 
to return home.  
 
The barrel text could be understood as a rather 
beautiful birth certificate of human rights.115  
 
By putting this barrel on display, the United Nations was affirming a very early dot in a long and 
zigzagging sequence that stretches over millennia of human civilization, in which the murmur of 
rights becomes increasingly pronounced.   
 
This chapter has joined this great dot-to-dot of political progress at the moment of the Tennis Court 
Oath in 1789, when the chorus of calls for human rights had developed real momentum. Yet as we 
have just noted, the line of advance was never linear. Almost immediately after that burst of life and 
solidarity, the French regressed into division and destruction.  
 
Indeed, this pattern would continue throughout the 19th century. When many millions of men and 
women were added to the voting registers of nations in the first quarter of the twentieth century, it 
felt like a positive crescendo was taking place. It looked like the march of democracy had really 
found its rhythm.  
 
 
114 It is a replica, the original “Edict of Cyrus” is now housed in the British Museum. 
115 This was certainly the case made by the Shah of Iran who gifted a copy of the barrel to the UN. However, if 
we were to consult historians of this ancient period in Mesopotamia they would inform us that there are 
several texts with similar declarations which date much further back, as far as the 3rd millennium BC. Still, this 
is a beautiful object with many layers of significance.   
Figure 10 The  “Edict of Cyrus”, 539BC. 
