Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 131 
(BACK) 
 
If governments started pouring millions into climate education how effective would it actually be if it 
only replicated the same moral messaging about individual actions? How would any student get a grip 
on the overall crisis if most of the content is only looking at particular problems such as rising sea 
levels, or more intense and frequent storm events?   
Where would these funds go? If they went into a general school budget how would the extra resources 
be spent effectively? Most school timetables are so loaded with curriculum demands that they keep 
climate change at the margins, as a final, bolt-on thought. Who would teach the new material? If space 
was made in the timetable, how would students get a clear view of what is really going on at a systems 
level? What learning materials would they use? Generally, the materials are either far too atomised 
and basic or they are far too specialised and advanced.  
Indeed, this set of problems in education is symbolic of the climate crisis across the whole of our 
society.  
We have no central handle on it. We only have a limited awareness of the systemic threat. There is 
deep siloed knowledge in university research papers on the one hand, and very generalised, 
sometimes confused public understanding on the other.  
The CUTx Index cuts through the noise and offers an immediate view of where we are, and the 
Academy offers that clear vantage point to the world.  
The 
Climate 
Academy 
was 
founded in 2011 to make the gap 
between the science and social 
reality both clearly and widely 
understood. This commitment to a 
“Systemic Understanding” has 
remained the first pillar of the 
Academy. Ten years ago, however, 
it only existed as a singular school 
lunchtime project, and therefore it 
was 
rather 
difficult 
to 
communicate this reality gap with 
any volume at all.  
Therefore, a further two pillars have been added.  
Through “Civic Service” the core truths studied in the Academy are brought into the democratic space 
as the students publish articles and podcasts, make short films and host events. Students learn so 
much about the science themselves, and those around them when they commit to sharing their time 
and understanding with others.  
And this second pillar needs to be undertaken in a savvy way because the carbon budget fuses for 
1.5°C and 2°C warming are so short. In the third pillar of the Academy: “Systems Entrepreneurship”, 
it is fundamentally important to think and act in a way that has the most dynamic systems impact. 
Whilst individual lifestyle choices are an irreducibly important component of the full solution, the crisis 
is too complex and deeply rooted for that to be anywhere near sufficient on its own. The inspiring 
truth about engaging with the problem at a full systems level is that it challenges and develops the 
students in a genuinely holistic way – in mind, heart, and ‘soul’.  
