Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 279 
(BACK) 
 
were trying to do something meaningful for the climate crisis, and we had to confront human 
banality, mindless officialdom, or crushing practical inconveniences, Franz Kafka was there with us.  
And, as will become clear, lurking in the shadows of his alienated landscapes, there is a playfulness 
and resilience that we can take heart from.  
 
Franz Kafka (1883-1924) 
 “Literature is a hatchet with which we chop at the frozen seas inside us”.  
The novelist Franz Kafka grew up with a profound sense of 
alienation from the world. Born in 1883, into a German speaking 
Jewish family in Prague375, Kafka had to live all of his life with the 
sense that he was an outsider. The alienated texture of the 
world was felt most acutely in his private life due to the shadow 
cast over him by his bulking, obnoxious and bullying father.  
To make ends meet Kafka worked long dull hours at a desk in an 
insurance company office. He noted in his diary, “My job is 
unbearable to me because it conflicts with my only desire and 
my only calling, which is literature.... I am nothing but literature 
and can and want to be nothing else ... Nervous states of the 
worst sort control me without pause ... A marriage could not 
change me, just as my job cannot change me”. He was engaged 
many times, but never married. He was tortured by sexual 
desire. 
He died, aged just 40, after a painful fight with tuberculosis.  
Fortunately for the world, Kafka articulated his anxiety and sense 
of the absurd in incredible works of literature. Arguably the greatest writer of the 20th century376, his 
novels conjure up compellingly surreal worlds within which the main characters find it oddly 
impossible to get a grip of what is going on.  
The best way to introduce Kafka is simply allow him to introduce himself.  
Here are the opening lines of his most famous work, Metamorphosis (1915).  
 
 
375 This was a minority within a minority, in a world in which antisemitism was ratcheting up.  
376 W.H. Auden called him “the Dante of the twentieth century”.  
Figure 50, Franz Kafka (from Pictures of a 
Life by Klaus Wagenbach (1984)) 
