Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 41 
(BACK) 
 
Conclusion 
 
The earth as a 24-hour clock 
Planet Earth will keep on spinning around. It has no preference for the number of species alive. It 
does not favour greenhouse or icehouse conditions. The Earth has seen both extremes of the 
temperature scale.  In the Hadean Period55 the average temperature was around 230°C, and in the 
Archean Period that followed, insanely powerful hurricanes steamrollered across the surface of the 
warm oceans. Yet, any alien passing by in a UFO during the Cryogenian Period (700 million years ago) 
would have seen the Earth as a giant “Snowball”56.  
 
But we care.  
 
The fragile experiment that we call human civilisation has all happened in the narrowest segment of 
planetary time. Our advanced society only got started after the frosty fingers of the glacial maximum 
started its retreat in 17,000BC. To put that in its proper perspective, the fragility of our enterprise is 
best appreciated by thinking of the 4.54 billion year history of the Earth  as a 24-hour clock.  It was 
bombarded by meteorites until 03:00 in the morning, after which organic life mysteriously appears 
at 04:00 which starts to provide us with the first fossils to look at from 05:36. Single-celled algae 
show up at 14:00 in the afternoon, but we need to wait until as late as 22:56 to observe the first 
dinosaurs. Mammals arrive at 23:39. Finally, humans turn up at 23:59:43, just 17 seconds before 
midnight. We have been on this planet for a mere 0, 02% of its existence. Within this tiny percentage 
homo sapiens have only recently just got going with our major construction projects – the Egyptian 
pyramids, the Medieval Cathedrals, the Sydney Opera House… they were all put up within the last 
second of this 24-hour clock.  
 
When geologists create visual simulations of the planet to show how it must have looked in the deep 
past, as a snowball earth or a greenhouse earth, it is hard to imagine the size of the forces that must 
have been at work over millions of years to make such transformations possible.  
Curiously the most visible thing on Earth today, as seen from space, is Belgium. The country famous 
for beer, chocolates and Kevin De Bruyne, is less well known for its remarkably complete set of 
streetlights. The 2.2 million bulbs (at an average of 233 per square kilometre) create the most intense 
cluster of light on the planet. Indeed, aside from Belgium, the streetlights that are scattered across 
the surface of the Earth represent the awesome power of the nearly8 billion humans who populate it. 
These lights represent just a fragment of the energy that human beings are affecting the planet with, 
on every spin.  
Our glitzy lights have turned the Earth into a giant Disco Ball. Perhaps a ‘Disco Ball Earth’ could work 
as an apt symbol for the Anthropocene? It certainly sums up the scale and style of the human 
colonisation of the planet.  
 
 
 
55 Appropriately named after Hades 
56 Or « Slushball » if you are Geologist who thinks that the ice didn’t quite cover the Equator.  
 
