Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 132 
(BACK) 
 
The Academy offers a safe and structured space for anyone to play their role in advancing our 
awareness of the systemic problems and solutions.209 The most obvious place to set up an Academy 
is within a school. The “free space” of education, the energy of youth and the social capital embodied 
in a school community is a wonderfully powerful foundation. But any group of citizens, with half an 
hour per weekend to read a chapter and a space in the week to chew over the details (and a biscuit) 
can get started.   
Conclusion 
  
 
Back to the Blue John canyon with Aron Ralston.  
The changes required in the 1970s, when we had a very complete understanding of the science, 
could have been implemented with ease. Even as late as 1995, when the first COP was held in Berlin, 
the bending of the emissions curve would have been very achievable with a determined effort. But 
we just didn’t want to look at it.  
Now, the size of the reductions necessary for 1.5°C is way beyond anything in public discourse at the 
moment. In fact, even remaining anything under 2°C is difficult to imagine from here, given the lack 
of momentum. Very bold decisions must be taken now at a major systems level. COP27 in Egypt 
(2022) must give a massive policy signal to the markets. Infrastructure change takes years, and our 
ability to deal with the problem with small individual gestures was toasted many years ago.  
Just as Aron Ralston had to get his reason to somehow override his instincts, we must set in place 
some laws that frame our ambitions for economic growth within the boundaries defined by our 
planet.  
Ralston was faced with a mind melting choice. Lose half an arm or die.  
Climate change puts us in front of a similar choice.  
The people in the streets shouting for justice are categorically not soft minded idealists.  
They are the hard realists.  
Change is not too difficult to deliver. We can do it. It needs guts and clear minded focus, but we can 
do it.   
 
 
 
209 “The Climate Academy Teacher Guide” (2022) offers a full explanation of both the practical mechanics of 
running an Academy and of the principles and values that underpin it. 
