Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 40 
(BACK) 
 
by Professor Johan Rockström. This summary from the ‘Stockholm Resilience Centre’54 pictures 
different aspects of our incursions into the planet’s natural systems into a radar like image. It shows 
where our economic activity has led us to overstep numerous planetary boundaries. The dashed 
border drawn represents the boundary lines for different aspects of our environmental situation. 
The further we overstep the boundary the higher the risk is that we throw the whole system out of 
balance and render it hostile to us.  
This ‘radar’ summary chart represents 
thousands of scientific papers.  Any summary 
would require references to the original 
sources to justify the conclusions for which 
there is no time at all here. However, it 
remains a valid move to provide an overview 
of the current science with a wider zoom lens. 
Summaries serve an important role in making 
the main conclusions clear. Namely, the future 
of human civilisation will only be a prosperous 
and peaceful one if we take a major step back 
from the limits of the natural world.  
 
There are two red zones of particular concern: 
the integrity of the biosphere and the crisis we 
have in biogeochemical flows. The threat of 
degrading biodiversity has already been noted. 
Indeed, the farming practices that are a 
primary drive behind this loss are also the 
cause of the red signal that can be seen for 
Phosphorus and Nitrogen flows. The 
unsustainable use of fertiliser (and pesticides) 
is covered with striking images and analysis in the Netflix documentary “Kiss the Ground”.  
 
To conclude this section on planetary boundaries it is worth noting that there is one area of the 
radar that is in the safe green zone – Stratospheric Ozone depletion. The hole in the Ozone layer that 
opened up above Antarctica is no longer a threat to human beings. The Montreal Protocol was 
adopted in 1989, just 16 years after the danger had been uncovered by scientists. The agreement to 
cull CFCs to a safe level was a quick and highly effective step by the global community of nations, as 
Kofi Annan, the former UN Secretary-General noted, the Montreal Protocol is "perhaps the single 
most successful international agreement to date". 
 
A fuller guided tour through the different segments of this model is available with Sir David 
Attenborough, in the documentary “Breaking Boundaries” (2021). Attenborough comments, there 
has “never been a more important time to communicate the science of what is happening to our 
planet. The research featured in Breaking Boundaries is one of the clearest explanations I’ve seen of 
the threats we face and how we might tackle them.” 
 
 
 
54 Steffen et al. 2015. “Planetary Boundaries: Guiding human development on a changing planet”. Science Vol. 347 no. 
6223. 
