Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 288 
(BACK) 
 
reader against fatalism or unnecessary panic. These thresholds have not yet been reached, 
and with a radical change of gear we could still avoid the worst.  
 
b) No clear line between success or failure 
Stabilising temperatures at 2.1°C above the pre-industrial level is far better than pushing 
them as high as 2.9°C; keeping the increase at 2.11°C rather than 2.19°C is also significantly 
better. The lines drawn in the sand by scientists are the key limits, they mark important 
points – however, success or failure is not a binary issue, so every single small step forward 
should be celebrated as such – without losing sight of the bigger picture. 
c) Mark out what you can and cannot do. 
No one individual can save the world. Anyone suffering from an Atlas Complex needs to take 
the world off their shoulders. This might sound like an obvious thing to do, but the syndrome 
is more common than we might expect and the removal of the world from the shoulders is 
also more difficult than we might predict. It is sometimes important to look up at the bigger 
picture, but most of the time, our focus and energies are best invested in projects that are 
within reach.   
 
d)  Nietzsche on guilt  
One of the most astute observers of human psychology 
was the Philosopher Friedreich Nietzsche (d. 1900). 
Widely considered as the greatest writer of German 
prose since Geothe, he could have easily featured in the 
main section of this chapter. But there is a whole book 
about him and climate change out there: “Nietzsche 
Tackles Climate Change” (2024).  
 
Nietzche had an important insight about our reactions 
to situations of profound pain and powerlessness, when 
there is no possibility to make a meaningful response 
that has any traction at all. Nietzsche understood that 
the anger generated in such a situation has to be 
discharged; it has to go somewhere.  And since it cannot 
be unloaded onto the cause of the problem (because it 
just bounces off) - the anger is unloaded onto the self, in 
the form of guilt.  
 
Nietzsche was thinking through the history of guilt and 
resentment in western culture in his book ‘The 
Genealogy of Morals’ (1886). He thought that a key 
moment had occurred in the minds and hearts of the Jewish people who had found 
themselves living in occupation under the immovable weight of the Roman Empire. The 
anger that they could not externalize onto the system that oppressed them, was then 
internalized into a violence against themselves.  
 
Figure 52, Portrait of Friedrich Nietzsche, 
1882; One of five photographs by 
photographer Gustav Adolf Schultze, 
Naumburg, taken early September 1882. 
