Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 205 
(BACK) 
 
 
The “PIT” stands for Public Irrationality Theory as, conversely, the lower the level of rationality, the 
more the public don’t see what dangers lie ahead. The people who would score in the lower 
scientific percentiles, are typically “fast thinkers”, they act instinctively, don’t know much science 
and generally have a poor grasp of how science works. They could also be easily misled with 
misinformation as they don’t tend to think like scientists in a “slow”, “System 2” type way.  
 
Yet.  
The results of a wide-ranging survey by Yale University found that the PIT prediction does not match 
reality. 
 
Being better at science does not make any difference to how someone would perceive the risk of 
climate change294. The line in the graph on the right, which represents the average response by 
those who undertook the scientific intelligence test295, and then the survey, shows that a higher 
scientific comprehension has no effect. The further to the right that the line moves, it does not push 
up the perceived risk of climate change.  
 
Instead, the line hangs close to zero. In fact, it even tilts downwards a little. Such a result seriously 
undermines the idea that people don’t know enough about climate science and that they need 
educating to act and vote more effectively. They do know things. But the ‘cognitive bias’ at work in 
their ‘System 1’ thinking strongly skews the way in which they see the science at a ‘System 2’ level.   
 
Reading into the lines 
 
Kahan’s findings go further.  
 
In the double graph below, the graph on the left shows that ordinary Climate Science intelligence 
does not make you more likely to get the answer right about whether “recent global warming is 
mostly due to human activity such as the burning of fossil fuels”. Those in the bottom one percent 
achieve a similar correct response rate as those in the smartest one percent of the survey. However, 
when political commitments are filtered, it becomes clear that the overall correct response rate is 
the product of two widely different sets of answers from Democrats and Republicans.   
 
294 Journal of Science Communication, Vol. 14, No. 3, 2015 
295 Say which test it is 
