Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 200 
(BACK) 
 
Climate change is happening in our blind spot. Look at the “Warming Stripes” above. These stripes 
demonstrate just how radical the shift in the average global temperature has been since the start of 
the Industrial Revolution. The first stripe of colour on the left, represents the average global 
temperature for the year 1850; the last stripe of colour, on the right, represents the latest thermal 
data. There is a vivid contrast between the cool blue colours on the left and the hot reds on the 
right. 
Indeed, there is no point staring at the weather to understand climate change. It is happening at a 
level way beyond our senses. These bands of colour are rooted in a vast amount of data, over time 
and space, and they are made visible to us by the methodical reasoning of science. In this case, we 
should say a special thank you to Prof. Ed Hawkings, and the gridded data set of HadCRUT4.285  
Science can pause reality for us. It can put it on hold and into a space small enough for our eyes and 
brains to picture it. 
From perception to action 
The problem of perception in the Sorites paradox is mirrored in the problem of how we respond to 
the time ahead of us; the paradox captures a key truth about how we deal with all the time in 
everyday life. “Why start my tidying now?”, we ask ourselves; we could still get it done before the in-
laws arrive in two hours. “Why start my homework now?”. “Why start packing the suitcase now?”. 
There is, and there isn’t, a moment when it actually becomes too late to get off the sofa…  
And it is the same for everything. 
It is the same for climate change. 
We have one thing to do: reduce greenhouse gases concentrations in the atmosphere to a safe level. 
We have mentally resolved to do it for decades. But look at the Keeling Curve, look at the warming 
stripes. We have only ever increased our emissions, we have never stabilised them, and we have 
certainly not yet started to decrease them.286 
Why? One fundamental reason is that it has always seemed possible to delay the action. 
The need for binding laws 
To conclude. In everyday life, we might struggle to find the control that is required to overcome an 
addiction. This is because the psychology of it all is underpinned by this Sorites Paradox. That one 
biscuit, cigarette, bet, drink… doesn’t make a difference - but it does. As soon as things get vague, 
the resolve quickly slides away. 
In the climate crisis, we have a major focus on individual actions. But small dots of will power are 
never ever going to get us out of it. We will always be fighting a losing battle against the 
 
285 More specifically, the warming stripes come HadCRUT4 gridded dataset from global historical surface 
temperature anomalies relative to a 1961–1990 reference period. Earlier data sets are available for each 
month, since January 1850, and can be found in the collaborative work of the Met Office Hadley Centre and 
the Climatic Research Unit at the University of East Anglia. 
286 Apart from the unintended consequences of the coronavirus in 2020. 
