Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 127 
(BACK) 
 
in this field of chemical engineering might actually take this aspect of the technology from distant 
sci-fi dreaming closer to reality.207  
  
Once a plan to reduce GHGs for every greenhouse gas emitting sector of the economy is put in place, 
there would then be a huge argument between each sector about which one goes first. Why should 
the transport sector have to be the first one to act in 2022? Why should the food industry have to 
achieve all its reductions in 2023? The role of a competent government would be to take all those 
transformations and line them up in a proper sequence, evenly and strategically distributed. Each 
sector can then fulfil its responsibility for their national economy to complete its role in keeping the 
global temperature rise under 2°C.  
This is not the place to work through the complexities of how this might be done, let alone for each 
individual economy. Instead, it aims to serve as a taste of the kinds of system thinking that is 
required. In fact, the energy sector would certainly have to move first, because this part of the 
economy fuels all the sectors and, therefore, all the subsequent infrastructure and industry 
transformations could be achieved with low carbon emissions.  
 
Secondly, there are a lot of cross-sector targets that could be done too, such as increasing efficiency 
and reducing waste. Most importantly, reducing emissions sufficiently will not be possible without 
drastically reducing the background energy use and consumption. Indeed, there are thousands of 
books and academic papers that provide insights and guidance for such challenges. 
 
However, this is not the point to get distracted, given that these types of publications do not provide 
their advice within a coherent plan that is based squarely on an absolute target provided by science. 
This short section is just a thought experiment (a type of writing that is frequently used in Philosophy). 
Thought experiments are deployed to get a clearer picture of the way things are behind the clutter of 
details. This scenario with all the 11% emission cuts lined up in a row has been constructed to illustrate 
the right pace of the reforms required, and to understand what a genuine effort to deal with climate 
change would look like.  
Perhaps the UK could be used as a more precise example of how it might all work out. Classified as a 
UHD nation, the UK needs to reduce its emissions by 8.1%. The government is advised to ‘reduce beef 
and lamb’ consumption by 50%, which will reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 3%. Stopping food 
waste will reduce emissions by 0.7%. Many people target airflights; these are about 7% of GHG 
emissions in the UK, so halving them would achieve a 3.5% reduction. These three actions together 
would get the UK close to the required annual reduction rate of 8.1% for 2022. Then the UK would 
have to plan for the next 8.1% for 2023, then 2024, until the UK is near zero carbon.  
Ultimately, it is a task for each nation state to complete these targets as democratically as possible. 
In theory, each nation should then come to the global table with their commitments that are rooted 
in the science and principles above and then combine their efforts with the same basic logic. Again, 
now is not the time to delve into the complexities of diplomatic negotiations. The point of this 
chapter is to point out the type of system thinking needed, and to show what is lacking amongst all 
the ubiquitous images of solar panels and battery powered cars, all the grand speeches given at COP 
meetings, and behind all the hugely important (but disparate) ambitions of different NGOs and 
action groups.  
 
207 For the moment, although the price has fallen to around $100 a tonne, the amount of energy required to 
build these machines, and the rate at which they can sink carbon keeps the mechanized sequestration of 
carbon far from being a realistic hope. 
 
