Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 231 
(BACK) 
 
Not everything is on the up  
 
Enter centre stage, Jean-Jacques Rousseau.  
 
A central figure for this chapter. His response to 
this pivotal moment in human history is deeply 
informative of the situation that we find ourselves 
in today with the bio-climate crisis.  
 
In the summer of 1749, he went to visit the 
imprisoned Diderot, who was locked up in the 
Vincennes fortress on the eastern side of Paris. 
Rousseau was his close friend and ally; indeed, he 
had penned a number of the early entries for the 
‘Encyclopédie’.  
 
However, whilst walking in the sunshine through a 
park towards the prison, Rousseau had an 
epiphany that stopped him in his tracks.   
 
It was a moment of enlightenment, but not one that anyone was expecting.  
 
Rousseau suddenly saw that all the progress in the Arts and Sciences were actually having a 
degenerative effect on ‘human morality’. His prizewinning essay, the “Discourse on the Arts and 
Sciences” (1750) pulled into question what we mean when we say the word “progress”. Whilst 
acknowledging the advantages of innovation, by noting the rising levels of science, technology and 
culture, he raised profound questions about the overall effect these things would have on human 
society.  
 
Rousseau’s work was controversial back in 1750. His heretical views about progress would be a 
major factor in the collapse of his friendship with Diderot and Voltaire.320  Yet, despite his detractors 
from the start, Rousseau’s critique of modern western civilisation has only become more and more 
perceptive and relevant. Rousseau was arguably the greatest of all the Enlightenment thinkers,321 
and one feature of his greatness is the fact that he was able to stand outside of the mood and trends 
of the time. The Enlightenment was a period of such confidence in the human ability to overcome 
natural, historical and individual boundaries; it was just jarring to have someone speak in a minor 
key about all the major achievements.   
 
Rousseau’s relevance to us might be difficult for us to appreciate at first glance. Not least because 
we live inside a culture that tends to see the past as something that we have progressed from. But 
the more banal truth is that the portraits of his time look distinctly alien. The pale faces that look out 
at us from the 18th century look like they have their heads full of fluffy, romantic thoughts. 
 
320 Rousseau was a complex character. For example, although he famously defended the virtues of 
breastfeeding and the family unit as the best place to nurture a young life, he and his lover Thérèse Levasseur, 
had abandoned their children (possibly 5 of them) to a children’s home. In his “Confessions” (1770), Rousseau 
wrote about his lack of trust in himself to be a decent father, but this gesture didn’t get him off the hook with 
Voltaire who publicly skewered him for it.    
321321 A Western Philosophical giant, Immanuel Kant (b. 1724), lived such an orderly life in Könisberg (Prussia), 
that it is said that the people of the city could set their watches by his daily walks. That is, apart from the week 
when he was not to be seen… because he was profoundly engaged in the reading of ‘Emile’ (1762) by 
Rousseau.  
Figure 43, Portrait of Rousseau by Maurice Quentin de 
La Tour (c1753) 
