Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 149 
(BACK) 
 
A few preliminary words…  
 
Perhaps surprisingly for a short textbook on climate change, this chapter is not actually going to talk 
about climate change. At all.  
 
As the title suggests, it will examine paradigms.  
The most helpful first step would likely be to offer a couple of definitions:  
 
It is rich word. It deserves our full attention for a whole chapter.  
 
Well, to be honest, the chapter will spin around to look at climate change directly at the very end. 
Yet, in the absence of explicit references, there will be numerous implicit implications for our 
situation with climate change all the way through.  
 
Readers are challenged to annotate the text, or make notes somewhere else, where they can 
identify parallels or implications for climate change. This change of approach makes the chapter a bit 
more of a game – a type of thinking that is important for our predicament. 
 
Indeed, if climate change were a problem that could be resolved in a fact-fight, then it would be 
rather simple to fix. This textbook would be much simpler to write. It would just list the key data, 
and perhaps show a few graphs - decisive action on climate change is such a no-brainer. Anyone 
with a bit of common sense and remote interest in living on a habitable planet would immediately 
see the importance of radical change. 
 
Unfortunately, this is not a fact-fight.  
 
And so, although we must be armed with the clearest view possible of the scientific truth, we must 
have a creative and strategic mind when we think and act.  
 
Onwards then, without any references to climate change, other than those that arise in your head 
and heart.    
 
 
 
A paradigm 
“A paradigm is a theory or a group of ideas about how something should be done, made, or thought 
about”. 
Britannica Dictionary 
“A paradigm is a set of assumptions, concepts, values, and practices that constitutes a way of viewing 
reality for the community that shares them, especially in an intellectual discipline”.  
The Free Dictionary  
 
