Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 78 
(BACK) 
 
Look Up 
 
Today, a violent storm is here again.  
 
Above our heads we have charged the atmosphere with a massive load of extra energy. Climate 
change has the capacity to unleash unparalleled violence on human civilisation. We must look up - 
not only at the atmosphere, but also at the democratic space above our heads. Both need continual 
efforts to protect them from the excesses of human ignorance, stupidity and greed.   
 
When Bailly stood in the Tennis Court and raised his arm straight, he was pointing up at something 
profoundly important. We need to keep looking at it.  
 
We no longer live in the Age of Enlightenment. We seem to live in an Age of Entitlement. Today, the 
existential threat we face does not come at us like a bullet or a bomb, it comes hidden behind the 
comforts of convenience. We need to call up all of cultural memory, sharpen our minds and 
remember our capacity for courage.  
 
 
The Space Above Our Heads  
Part Two 
 
 
It is informative to return to the Tennis Court. The painting can serve to establish some key details 
about the modern world and our climate crisis. 
 
1. No cropping – The Third Estate 
 
The reason why so many people were gathered here was that there was a deep resentment in 1789 
with the autocracy of the First (Ecclesiastical) and Second (Royal) Estates of France. The people 
framed by David here were from the Third (Everyone Else) Estate. They came to the Tennis Court to 
defiantly claim that the real France was embodied in them, and it was not represented in some 
inner, exclusive chamber of the Palace of Versailles where the other two estates were hanging out.   
 
School history books often invite us to look at this moment and remember the gross inequality of 
French society of the time. The famous text of Abbot Sieyès poses the question, “What is the Third 
Estate?”. Helpfully, he answers his own question, “What is the Third Estate? Everything. What has it 
been until now in the political order? Nothing. What does it desire to be? Something.” (“Qu’est-ce 
que le tiers état?”, January 1789). 
 
The contrasting fortunes of the different estates were stark: whilst many of the Third Estate 
struggled to afford bread, many of the Second Estate struggled to put on their ridiculously oversized 
wigs for a ball. Thomas Piketty’s economic research provides some enlightening numbers: “In France 
just before the Revolution of 1789, the proportion of national wealth held by the top 10 percent was 
about 90 percent, and the fraction possessed by the top one percent was as much as 60 percent.”117  
 
Such unenlightened times. 
 
117 Thomas Piketty, “Capital in the Twenty-First Century” (2013), p544.  
