Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 146 
(BACK) 
 
formation of algae in the polar regions was studied in depth and under the new conditions of rapid 
global warming. The problem with algae in the arctic is that it is far darker than ocean ice (0.50-0.70 
albedo value240) or fresh snow (0.8 albedo value). This darkness traps heat, which accelerates the 
warming, which encourages algae growth… and so on241.     
It is not that scientists were not aware of the dangers of algal growth and new, low albedo values in 
the polar regions, but the effects of photosynthetic organisms “had largely been ignored since early 
pioneering work”.242 An Abstract of further research states in its opening lines, “Some ecosystems 
can undergo abrupt transformation in response to relatively small environmental change. Identifying 
imminent ‘tipping points’ is crucial for biodiversity conservation, particularly in the face of climate 
change. Here, we describe a tipping point mechanism likely to induce widespread regime shifts in 
polar ecosystems.”243 
 
Little things can have a big impact, just talk to Scrat, the long-suffering Saber-tooth squirrel. His clumsy 
quest for the nut features that start of every Ice Age film – and he suffers relentlessly from the 
consequences of the tipping point that he triggers.  
Take care!  
Given the fact that such small junctions in dynamic systems can lead to such wild results, it would be 
prudent to write our climate policies with the “precautionary principle” in the foreground, not the 
distant background.244 This principle could be summarized as “informed prudence”.245 Under the 
precautionary principle, it is those who carry out the action who have the burden of demonstrating 
that it will not result in damage or harm. Such a framing of economic growth and development cuts 
against some psychological instincts that we have to push boundaries and take risks.  
In the velodrome, everything is simply geared for maximum speed. The bikes in indoor racing have no 
brakes. The sport demands maximum aerodynamic efficiency, and maximum speed is the goal to 
which everything else must be sacrificed. Likewise, the demands of the industrial economy have no 
other priority than profit and growth maximization. All other costs and concerns are external to this, 
and so long as the threat to these priorities can be pushed to the side, they will be. It is utterly 
unsurprising that we would find ourselves close to pushing nature over a tipping point. As stated at 
the beginning of the chapter, there was little reason to imagine that humans could actually have any 
significant print on the fundamental operating systems of the planet. Why would we need any brakes 
on economic growth? Why would we need to think about planetary boundaries?  
However, in the end, this is where we are. “Informed prudence” might not be a catchy advertising 
slogan, but when the effects of a false step might be so crunchingly negative and irreversible it is hard 
 
240 An albedo value of “1” indicates that a surface is a “perfect reflector”, and albedo value of “0” indicates that 
a surface is a “perfect absorber”.   
241 Just as the Jet Stream feeds off the temperature gradients between the equator and the poles, the Gulf 
Stream is powered by rising and sinking waters due to temperature and salinity differences. Changes to ocean 
temperatures will therefore alter circulation regimes. These feedbacks are monumental in scale compared to 
the tiny little algae that can trigger them.  
242 Yallop, M., Anesio, A., Perkins, R. et al. Photophysiology and albedo-changing potential of the ice algal 
community on the surface of the Greenland ice sheet. ISME J 6, 2302–2313 (2012). 
243 “Light driven tipping points in the polar system” Global Change Biology (2013), doi: 10.1111/gcb.12337 
244 This principle is the basis of European Environmental law – even if the EU still has climate policies that do not 
go far enough.  
245 Or more fully, “When an activity raises threats of harm to human health or the environment, precautionary 
measures should be taken even if some cause-and-effect relationships are not fully established scientifically”. 
(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15968832/) 
