Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 328 
(BACK) 
 
So if the overarching goal of the Academy was to develop autonomous students, thinking and acting 
out of a reverence for wisdom, how did Plato imagine think this could be achieved?  
The Original Academy Programme 
The original Academy expected its students to be there for decades of learning. Like a good wine, 
wisdom takes years to develop depth and quality.  
Fortunately, we have a very good idea of what happened in Plato’s Academy, because he writes 
about it. In his most famous book, “Republic” (375BCE), Plato provides us with a picture of the 
“syllabus” that his students would follow. He called it “The Divided Line” 416, a simplified version is 
set out here: 
 
 
Students would start by engaging with the real world in all its messy details (A). They would spend 
time learning about History, Art, Literature and so on. Then, they would advance to a more 
systematic level of things, through a study of what we would today understand as “Science”. This 
scientific block of time (B) is bigger because identifying the underlying principles behind the details 
of the physical world is more exacting and demanding.  
Eventually, the Academy students would pass over “The Divided Line” marked out in bold. The 
progression into the study of Geometry and Mathematics (C) is significant because now what the 
students are grappling with are absolute, permanent truths. 2+2=4 is true in Indonesia just as it is 
true in Italy. It was true in 375 BCE just as it will be true in 2375 CE.  
Perhaps someone would like to protest that Science has been unfairly downgraded by Plato? Maybe 
an argument could be raised that Science belongs to the other side of the dividing line? In response, 
Plato would point out that our understanding of the natural world is always zigzagging forward, the 
conclusions of science are tentative and continually being upgraded: for example, Galileo overturned 
the assumptions of Aristotle, Einstein overturned the basic assumptions of Newton, and in time, 
Quantum Theory will be put into a new perspective by another breakthrough in understanding.  
And this then takes us to the final, biggest, section of the table. After years of working through 
sections A, B, C, an Academy student would arrive at Philosophy. A ‘subject’ with no boundaries, a 
subject with a 360° perspective. Once students arrive in this final section (D) they are dealing with 
the glue to everything and continually revisiting their assumptions.  
 
416 “The Divided Line” (509d-511e). ‘Republic’ (c375BC).  
Opinion  
Knowledge 
A                  B 
 
C                                                     D 
Art  
History 
Language 
Geo  
   
Science  
Mathematics 
Philosophy 
The senses  
The intelligence 
