Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 244 
(BACK) 
 
those “two lovely mature Italian cheeses”. In a children’s park we would not ask someone if they had 
seen a “blue little small ball”, or your dog’s “chewing plastic white bone big”.  
These rules are just so deeply embedded into our natural experience and use of the language it does 
not take any effort to do things according to the rules. When we see the rules for the first time, it is 
shocking to think that your brain can do such an instant processing of a quite a complicated list 
whilst speaking at the same time.  
A similar hidden prioritising is happening when we think about environmental issues. And these 
background rules, that are formed inside a capitalist culture, prioritise certain kinds of thinking and 
action. Therefore, once you have seen the bigger picture, it really hurts to listen to media coverage 
of the crisis, because the grammatical mistakes of the public figures or politicians who are speaking 
do not get challenged or corrected.  
The ostensible content of what they are saying might be good and laudable, but the grammar is all 
wrong. For example, there is a very odd ‘priority’ given in schools, the media (and everywhere), to 
actions such as improving recycling and reducing plastic waste. These things are just not the first, 
primary issues. We cannot be speaking about these things without having first acknowledged the 
background juggernaut of surging demand and consumption. It is just jarring.  
 
Of course, just like in the sentence, “blue little small ball” there is nothing wrong with each word; 
likewise, every recycling act is important part of the whole, but there are other issues that need to 
be put first.  
It is informative to look at one example. Given the overwhelming dominance that plastic waste has 
had in environmental awareness for decades, we might then expect that the situation would be 
improving. However, the opposite is true. The “Global Plastics Outlook: Policy Scenarios to 2060” 
(published by the OECD in 2023) states that, “The modelling projections suggest that under current 
policies, by 2060, the use of plastics could almost triple globally, driven by economic and population 
growth” and that, “Plastic waste is also projected to almost triple by 2060, with half of all plastic 
waste still being landfilled and less than a fifth recycled”. 336 
  
The italics in the quote have been added to point to the fundamental cause of the problem. In all our 
efforts to reduce plastics, there is a background algorithm that remains fixed on increasing growth. 
And it is the same across the entire system. The situation would have been worse without all the 
publicity on plastics, but this one example illustrates how important it is to look structurally and 
systematically and not be lured into individual and limited narratives when it is at the expense of the 
bigger picture.337 Progress in plastic waste will remain elusive until we get our environmental 
grammar fixed.  
 
 
336 https://www.oecd.org/environment/plastics/ 
337 The ‘grammatical’ point here is that things should be properly prioritized. But in the case of plastics, we 
could go one step further, and simply insist that ‘plastics’ and ‘climate change’ should not even be appearing in 
the same sentence. One is an issue of pollution; the other is emissions. Plastics have an extensive, ugly, and 
damaging impact on the natural world, but climate change has the potential to crash the entire system. As a 
teacher and father, I have hundreds of anecdotal examples of when these two things have been taught 
together in a Secondary school lesson on “the environment”. And by putting all green things side by side, it 
easy to think that they are issues of equal importance. And the ‘grammatical’ work, to put things in a proper 
priority, has not been done by the teacher.  
 
