Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 313 
(BACK) 
 
sciences and the natural sciences. In fact, nothing is outside of its scope. It is an attempt to establish 
a functional map of what lies beneath everything.  
The Adaptive Cycle 
Imagine that you are looking at the Earth from outer space, and the zoom of your gaze starts to 
move closer. Past the stratosphere, towards a continent, then a country. From here closer in 
towards a city, a suburb, a street, a house. Then through a window to a room, to a table, to an object 
on the table; then inside the object, right down to its atoms, the subatomic, and so on.  
Imagine that Pythagoras was right. Imagine that the fundamental organizing principle of the 
universe was numbers. This is not impossible. Indeed, a chat with a Quantum Physicist over a beer 
might lead your thoughts in this direction. Or more speculatively, it is a conclusion that becomes 
oddly plausible after watching the movie, “The Matrix” (1999).404 Put bluntly, it is quite possible that 
we are just simply flickering binary numbers, perhaps rooted in a supercomputer (from some far-off 
place in time and space).  
Now this is a bit of a cheeky move. But now imagine a diagonal thought to this.  
Imagine that at the very root of everything there was not binary code, but the number 8. On its 
side405. Like an infinity loop.  
Well, you don’t have to imagine it. It is pictured below.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This figure 8 ribbon is what Complex Systems Theorists have discovered at the deepest level of 
things. It is like a bit of code that can be observed in operation everywhere where there is 
complexity. It seems to be a fundamental dynamic to all complex systems.  
 
404 A reading of Nick Bostrom’s recent philosophy also makes the likelihood of this world being ‘real’ unnervingly 
improbable. His “Simulation Hypothesis” is an advance the thought experiment first mapped out by Descartes in his “3 
waves of doubt” (“Mediations”, 1641).  
405 Sometimes tilted. 
