Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 188 
(BACK) 
 
MLK unapologetically upheld the values and the vision that were needed to sustain an effective 
response to the systemic racism that black people had suffered for centuries. His striking skills of 
oratory managed to billow the sails of movement with strength and courage, but he never lost sight 
of the final destination for all of the protests and activism: civil rights had to be enshrined into law. 
“Keep your eyes on the prize” went the famous protest song. Any other gestures made by those in 
power were considered as a patronising distraction. 
In 1963, in the middle of a speech at the Lincoln Memorial, Washington, Mahalia Jackson shouted 
out: “Tell us about the dream, Martin!” – and he set off on a rhetorical riff that gave the speech its 
name. These lines about his dream provided the headlines and fixed the key vocabulary of how that 
moment would be remembered by history. However, before the request by Mahalia Jackson, MLK 
had been delivering some major points too. It is helpful to read this lesser known section of his 
speech with the context of the climate emergency and the recent climate protests borne in mind: 
 
“We have also come to this hallowed spot to remind America of the fierce urgency of now. This is no 
time to engage in the luxury of cooling off or to take the tranquilising drug of gradualism. Now is the 
time to make real the promises of democracy. Now is the time to rise from the dark and desolate 
valley of segregation to the sunlit path of racial justice. Now is the time to lift our nation from the 
quicksand of racial injustice to the solid rock of brotherhood. Now is the time to make justice a 
reality for all of God’s children.”  
Throughout his leadership of the Civil Rights Movement, Martin Luther King would never accept small 
political victories or concessions as something that he was supposed to be grateful for. He refused to 
accept that the status quo was reasonable, and that any progress was some sort of a gift.  
He was intolerant of each incomplete gesture towards the systemic problems faced by non-white 
people in America, even if they were positive steps forward. He understood that the only proper 
response to their demands for justice was full equality before the law. Anything less than that was 
piecemeal, patronising and fundamentally ineffective.  
Medgar Evers 
And so finally.  
Martin Luther King was the strong face and the resonant voice of the Civil Rights Movement, but , 
there were many other people with pivotal roles who stood right alongside him. This chapter is 
bookended by two of them. It started by pointing at the impact of Mamie Elizabeth Till-Mobley; her 
contribution is too often overlooked. It will finish by putting the spotlight on another character 
whose fundamentally important contribution to the Civil Rights Movement is not often recognised 
either.  
His name is Medgar Evers.  
Like with Emmett Till, his story and his death are revealing.  
The Civil Rights Movement was not only a protest movement. It also had a legal backbone. This was 
sustained by the NAACP (National Association for the Advancement of Coloured People). As well as 
the decisive breakthroughs in both 1964 (The Civil Rights Act) and 1965 (The Voting Rights Act), they 
