Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 98 
(BACK) 
 
This chapter could stop now. But, as noted earlier, the pointed finger of this chapter is a diagnostic 
one. We need to understand the deeper matrix of factors that prevent such clarity from the reaching 
the surface of the media, and the surface of school textbooks.  
Therefore, the rest of this chapter will attempt to lift the lid a little further. It will try to open up a 
clearer view of climate responsibility and impacts through two case studies. The key issues will be 
opened up by a sustained look at India, and the key conclusions will be drawn through the case of 
Kenya. Both examples will hopefully illuminate some of the major reasons why we have a ‘systems 
blindness’ to the true causes and effects of the climate crisis.  
 
CASE STUDY ONE – India 
An overview 
1866 - Orissa 
The date is 1866. The place is Orissa, in northeastern India. A famous date and a famous place that 
all English school children know. Like 1066 (The Battle of Hastings) and 1666 (The Fire of London) 
and 1966 (when football briefly came home to Wembley). 
To be more correct: this is a date and place that almost no English school children know about.  
The details? In 1866, Orissa was marked by a gargantuan famine. This area suffered a drought in 
1865 when the monsoon rains failed. Over one million people died the following year. Or from 
another brutal statistical angle: the famine killed one in three people. Drought was not unusual in 
the subcontinent. However, this one struck with a savage force because it hit in an area that was 
under British rule, and the British response was appalling.  
This famine has been cropped out of our cultural memory, so it helps to play a bit of starvation 
hopscotch. If we hop backwards to 1837-1838 we land on a famine in the northwest provinces which 
killed 800,000, followed by another 2 million deaths in the same area in 1860-61. If we hop forward 
to 1896-97 under the British Raj, we land on a famine that wiped out over 5 million lives across large 
zones of India, and with short skip to 1899-1900 another draught killed around another 1 million. 
Finally, we could jump to the end of the British Raj. In 1943, the Bengali Famine caused the deaths of 
around 3 million people.  In fact, we could play the hopscotch for longer, moving backwards and 
forwards onto squares of profound suffering.  
In total, an estimated 30 million people died of starvation during British rule in India. 146 
Even if we were to restore these famines to our historical awareness, it is hard to get past our 
‘psychic numbness’147 at such massive figures. It is hard to imagine the scale of the suffering 
involved. So in an odd way, it is easier to see the impact of these famines when we take the 30 
million down to just 11 individuals.  
 
146 As Tim Dyson notes (p137) calculating populations and deaths is not straightforward as the data is far from 
complete and a range of assumptions need to be made about which deaths are included in the statistics. 
Dyson, Tim. “A Population History of India: From the First Modern People to the Present Day”. (OUP, 
2018) However, even if 30 million is too low, or too high, the sheer weight of numbers is truly formidable.  
147 cf. Chapter 12, “The Psychology of Climate Change”.  
