Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 115 
(BACK) 
 
contrast, the greenwashing of the fossil fuel giants is slick and comfortable; but both forms of 
control are deeply destructive and unjust. 
Environmental damage and human welfare are not part of the algorithms embedded in their 
spreadsheets. Dollars can buy you high level scientific understanding, but they cannot buy you a 
moral conscience.  
The big cropping out of responsibility  
When an industry makes an average of 
$2.8bn a day [sic] [indeed] over 
several decades193, it does not just buy 
a lot of scientific research, it also buys 
a lot of media power.  
One last look back at India brings to 
the surface a key reason why the 
climate crisis is covered in such a timid 
and foggy way by most media 
organisations. Both the East India 
Company, and the British Raj that 
followed, blocked criticism and key 
facts from the public view through 
their direct and indirect control of the 
media.  
For example, the first newspaper to be printed in Asia was ‘The Hickey’s Bengal Gazette’, set up by 
an eccentric Irish man, James Augustus Hickey. However, it only lasted for two years (from 1780 to 
1782) because it was critical of the East India Company (who through a court ruling, confiscated their 
types and presses).  
In 1857, when the local population rebelled against the company a “Gagging Act” was put in place by 
Lord Canning, who controlled the press through a very strict set of licensing rules. In 1878, towards 
the end of the Great Famine, Lord Lytton introduced the “Vernacular Press Act” which prevented 
criticism of British policies.  
As a final example, in the Bengal Famine of 1943, substantial pressure was put on the two main 
newspapers (‘The Statesman’ & ‘Amrita Bazar Patrika’) to ‘calm public fears about food shortages’, 
and the word ‘famine’ was prohibited. ‘The Statesman’ later commented that the government, 
“seems virtually to have withheld from the British public knowledge that there was famine in Bengal 
at all”.  
The complacency, racism and greed of the British administration of India cost millions of lives. There 
were always other options available to the decision makers. But in the face of starvation, key 
bureaucrats, businessmen and politicians, body-swerved out of the way – and there was not a strong 
enough media to hold them to account. It is difficult to disagree with Nobel Memorial Prize-winning 
 
193 https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2022/jul/21/revealed-oil-sectors-staggering-profits-last-50-
years 
 
