Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 44 
(BACK) 
 
Introduction 
Spaceship Earth 
 
 
When considering sustainability, one of the most useful mental images to put in your mind is the 
image of a spaceship. Planet Earth is like a spaceship57, floating around in space (and if we really 
think about it, actually a lot of space). Life in such an isolated existence is more technically known as 
a “Closed Mass System”.  In other words: energy comes in (e.g. sunlight) but  no matter goes out. 
We cannot export pollution or greenhouse gas emissions, and there is no emigration of humans off 
this planet any time soon. There are a few minor exceptions to this situation, like meteorite strikes ( 
such as the one that hit Mexico) or the moonrocks that we collect ourselves58.  
 
The fact of the matter is that this is a closed mass place.  
 
Back to the spaceship. Imagine, you are on a spaceship with four other astronauts. Every step of the 
mission has been planned and executed with meticulous precision. You have a calculated amount of 
food and water to keep you alive for the duration of the mission, and although there is very limited 
space on board, you did agree to take a ukulele for a bit of a group vibe under the stars. (Having a 
limited space and a limited amount of supplies force every space mission to make some tough 
choices.) Then one of the astronauts starts to take four times the daily supply of food, water, 
oxygen, everything, causing shortages for everyone and jeopardising the mission. What would 
happen? Surely, once the other three astronauts found out, they would immediately take strong 
action to stop it, and fairness and equity would be quickly restored. 
 
All good. However, a few days later, you see another shuttle approaching the docking port of your 
craft. This was not something that had been planned by your team. These extra four people are a 
wonderful addition to the cosmonautical community. However, it is quickly apparent that there is 
simply not enough space for eight people on board the ship and you are astonished and troubled by 
the fact that they have arrived without any food supplies59. Again, the arithmetic of the spaceship 
life does not work. With no possibility of anyone taking a shuttle back to Earth, there is a major 
problem in this isolated, floating bubble of life. Not an inconvenient problem but an existential one.   
 
Thought experiments like this can help crystalise the essential co-ordinates and issues of a 
complicated situation. They also help illuminate simple truths or problems that are often hidden by 
the cluttered details of life.  
 
So what are the key issues here?  
 
 
57 The original idea for the notion of Spaceship Earth comes from the remarkable man Buckminster Fuller, and 
it was this image that rocked my world in 2011 when the remarkable Michael Wadleigh (Oscar Winner 
‘Woodstock’, 1970) opened out the consequences of living on a closed mass system for the first time to me at 
a Club of Rome event. He also introduced me and my students to the spaceship and football field thought 
experiments. 
58 To be precise, 382kg of moon rocks were collected by the 12 Apollo moonwalkers between 1969 and 1972. Three robotic 
Soviet missions (Luna 16, 20 and 24) also returned a total of 301 grammes in the 1970s. 
59 Just to pre-empt any possible idea that this is a metaphor that might carry some kind of racist message, it is emphatically 
not the case. In fact, as will become clear, it is the Ultra High Developed nations of the world who are (by far) the biggest 
consumers of planetary resources.   
