Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 353 
(BACK) 
 
Pillar Three 
Systems Entrepreneurship  
 
Plato set up his Academy to educate future Kings and Queens.  
He also bravely attempted to make a King into a Philosopher. 439 
“Until philosophers are kings, or the kings and princes of this world have the spirit and power of 
philosophy ... cities will never have rest from their evils” (‘Republic’, Chapter 5).  
 
Plato thought that reason should be in charge. He argued that wisdom 
was the first priority of a state. He was not against productivity and 
desires, but they had to be framed by reason.  
In a democracy, the operating system of the state is plugged into our 
desires. In our modern democracies the energy of these appetites has 
been supercharged by capitalism.  
As all of the previous chapters of this book have exposed, such a set up 
comes with major risks. 
For an Athenian culture so proud of its democracy, this analysis was shockingly counter-cultural. 
When Plato established his Academy in the hills to the north of the city, it would have been viewed 
by many as a pretty crazy, idealistic project. But as underlined at the start of this chapter, this 
distance between the Academy and the buzz of common sense, is a marker of something crucial 
about Plato’s Academic project. Sometimes it is important to take a few steps back from the busy 
details of city life.  
This distance between the city and the Academy creates a gap that enables those in the Academy to 
not just do “problem solving”, but engage in something deeper; namely, “problem framing”.  
Problem Framing  
Even if Plato’s Academy never produced any Philosopher Kings or Queens; even if Plato’s vision 
never became reality; he had understood so much about the limits of democracy and consumerism, 
and he had understood the fundamental value of education.   
“Education” is fundamentally about “leading out”. It is about cultivating the ability to think with 
autonomy, and this autonomy is rooted in a willingness to take a distance from the ruling 
assumptions of the world.  
 
439 This didn’t work out so well. After an invitation, Plato took a long and perilous journey to Sicily in 367BCE. 
He travelled in the hope of meeting with King Dionysus II and teaching him the value of wisdom and justice, 
but events flipped against Plato and he had to flee the country.   
