Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 94 
(BACK) 
 
in 1808139.  Do we still start secondary school Physics lessons by explaining that the Earth is not flat? 
Even the Ancient Greeks were able to calculate the planet’s (spherical) circumference and axial tilt 
with great accuracy.140  
Thinking that the Earth is flat in the year 2023 is a harmless piece of irony or idiocy. It hurts no-one, 
if people would like to keep the belief in a flat Earth idea alive and have a fridge magnet and 
membership card to prove it. However, the pantomime of distractions laid on for us by dangerous 
climate change denying clowns, egged on by the far-right or by the fossil fuel industry, should be 
firmly and decisively pushed forever to the sides. The proximity of a seismic collapse of the Earth’s 
most basic operating systems is too important to be faffed about with. 
Time to move on 
The climate change that is over our heads now is unambiguously anthropogenic.  
It is caused by humans.141 We are responsible.  
But that statement is far too general. It has not been caused by all humans equally. In fact, there are 
massive differences to be observed in who has put up the most greenhouse gases into the 
atmosphere, and which humans continue to do so.  
We don’t blandly state that “humans were responsible for the colonization of Africa”. It was 
evidently the Europeans who scrambled for it at the end of the 19th century. We don’t blankly assert 
that “humans were responsible for the holocaust”, it was the brutal, systematically engineered 
project of the Third Reich. Likewise, people living in Guatemala had nothing to do with the colonial 
genocide of aboriginal people in Australia; and people living in Latvia had nothing to do with the 
Rwandan genocide of 1994. A young man living in Cambodia today did nothing to contribute to the 
genocidal regime of Pol Pot; and a young woman growing up in modern day Chile could never have 
been complicit in the execution and torture of the thousands who “disappeared” under Augusto 
Pinochet’s rule. 
This string of sentences might seem like an obvious set of statements to make. However, these 
specific connections illuminate the lack of clarity that we have about who has, and who is, 
responsible for most of the emissions in the atmosphere; and crucially, who is suffering the most 
from it. There are massive imbalances and injustices embedded in the climate crisis. The MAPA 
(“most affected peoples and areas”) are tragically those who have contributed the least emissions - 
by a considerable distance; and as their acronym states – these are the people who are, and who 
will, suffer the most.   
This chapter will unashamedly do some finger pointing.  
Yes, it is an accusing finger, because there are racist and “nowist” (generational theft) dimensions to 
the crisis that truly stink. However, this pointing finger is primarily a diagnostic one. It seems that 
 
139 Dalton published “A New System of Chemical Philosophy” in 1808 which laid the foundations for modern 
atomic theory. We now have the beautiful fullness of the Periodic Table to fill in the details of Daltons’ 
insights.  
140 A shout out here for the Chief Librarian of Alexandria, Eratosthenes (276-195BCE) whose calculations in his 
(lost) work, “On the Measure of the Earth” got remarkably close to the right answer. He calculated that the 
meridian length of the planet was 252,000 stadia (39,060–40,320 km). The precise answer for our spherical 
Earth is 40,075.017 km around the equator, and 40,007.863 km around the poles. 
141 From the Greek, ἄνθρωπος (Anthropos) meaning humans; and γένεσις (genesis) meaning origin or source.  
