Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 295 
(BACK) 
 
routes of the ancient Greek city states fanned out from here and connected the Athenians to the 
commodities and cultures of Italy, Sicily, Egypt, the Levant and Arabia.  
At first glance, one of the most striking features of the Piraeus are the grid straight lines that are 
plugged into the central marketplace (the Agora). This birds-eye view looks like the street plans of 
modern cities like New York or Tokyo. It does not look like a typically tangled streets of an ancient 
town – where development grew sporadically and organically.  
Indeed, this the point of this first little urban section.  
The Piraeus is, in fact, the first example we have in history of town planning. The architect of those 
plans was a man called Hippodamus (Aristotle, Politics ii.8). It was one amongst a multitude of firsts, 
during the ‘Golden Age of Athens’. These decades, from 480 to 404 BCE were an absolutely 
astonishing segment of human history. It was a time in which so many cultural, social and political 
aspects of human life bounded forward together. From architecture to mathematics, from science to 
sculpture, from trigonometry to tragic plays, it was a dizzyingly progressive episode.  
So. 
In comparison to these monumental achievements, getting roads to run at right angles to each other 
might not sound like much of an achievement. Picking out Hippodamus’ town planning project, 
down the road in downtown Pireaus, might even seem a bit banal. However, his contribution to 
human history is much more significant than just drawing straight lines. What he was doing was 
thinking through how a city could optimise its infrastructure, land use and housing.  
It is useful to pause at this vantage point and recognize the significance of this neglected moment of 
human culture. By mapping things out first, before the building of the actual town, Hippodamus 
showed the value of putting some thought into the path taken by economic growth and how to 
make the best use of the resources. This rational step away from just the ad-hoc consequences of 
economic development is a notable step in human history. Town Planning might not sound like one 
of the most stirring achievements of the Ancient Greeks, however, without it, development can get 
very messy indeed.  
Chapter 13 on the “Paradox of Innovation”, exposed how it isn’t enough just to grow. It has to be 
growth that is sharply informed by the planetary boundaries. Only being committed to blunt 
“growth” (the one that are forced to follow in quarterly reports of GDP), is a profoundly limited and 
naïve way to build a society. Growth that is blind to various limits, dumb about deeper reflections of 
wellbeing, and deaf to the future, is not wise at all.   
 
 
