Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 186 
(BACK) 
 
based on the latest science of the carbon budget would signal that we are finally serious about the 
problem.  
They are both just acts of common sense that have been absurdly noticeable by their absence for 
decades.  Both, however, hold the potential for triggering the rapid transformative change we all 
need.  
 
1. A proper systemic education.   
How many students leave school with a grasp of the systemic understanding of the threat posed by 
climate change? How many young people have received an education about the crisis that takes 
them beyond a simple, fragmented impression of the problems? Why do we continue to bore and 
patronise the older students with the same old environmental clichés when there is such an 
intriguing and complex world out there to understand? How well are we preparing them for the 
world if we have not informed them about the true depth of the problem and if we have not given 
them the skills to respond? Why is education not asking itself the tough systemic questions?  
Malcolm Gladwell’s influential work, “The Tipping Point” (2000) had an important subtitle: “How 
Little Things Can Make A Big Difference”. Let’s not be too modest about the power of education to 
transform a society, schools are full of “little things that can make a big difference”, so to speak. At 
first glance, this trigger to bring about a regenerative transformation of society might seem like a 
longshot because students do not occupy any official positions of power. However, this is to ignore 
the fact that over 600 million students attended high school in 2022.280 Imagine the superpower 
potential that could be energised and mobilised if they had access to a balanced and informed view 
of the situation.   
Greta Thunberg put paid to the idea that one person can’t make a difference. Yes, she had a gift of 
clarity, resilience and understanding, but let’s not make an unhelpful idol out of her. There are surely 
millions of other students of a similar age who might offer transformative responses if they were 
given the chance.  
 
280 https://www.statista.com/statistics/1227098/number-of-pupils-in-secondary-education-worldwide/ 
