Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 337 
(BACK) 
 
teachers) to not have a Scooby Doo426 about how perilously close we are to a global, systemic 
catastrophe.  
A student timetable would typically have lessons of Maths, Physics, Chemistry, Biology, Music, Art, 
History, Geography etc. This educational model is a product of the industrial revolution within which 
it was born. Governments had a priority to establish a numerate and literate workforce, with the 
ability of some to specialize in a particular field at university.  
Divide and specialize is the main dynamic of anyone progressing through our educational system. Of 
course, there is nothing wrong with this, in itself. Indeed, it is both necessary and wonderful for 
humans to understand the world around them in greater and greater depth.  
Like in the example of Geometry above, this fight to get beyond a superficial understanding of things 
is an essential and beautiful human drive. The critical thinking and the vigorous examination of 
assumptions to get a grip on what is fundamentally true has been the hallmark of our greatest 
scientific and cultural achievements.  
However, in the original Platonic Academy, this curiosity and determination to get to the root of 
things was sustained within a wider concern for the whole. The push for depth was always upheld 
with the big picture in view.  
Where do we find environmental education today? It is fragmented into different subject silos, and 
sometimes wheeled out onto the stage of a school assembly.  
It is rather like our modern experience in a supermarket, where after filling our trolleys with 
different goods from different isles we are asked by the payment machine at the checkout if we 
would like to make a tiny donation to charity. It is not compulsory, and it is widely regarded as only 
an optional extra that an especially sensitive or kind student might be engaged in. Environmental 
education is just an afterthought in our schools, for particularly ‘good’ people.  
A quick return to the beehive can help illustrate the profound problem of neglecting the bigger 
picture.  
A biology teacher might give a particular lesson on the anatomy, habitat and habits of a bee. 
However, it might not be made clear what a fundamentally important role they play in the entire 
biosphere. The lone bee might be a fascinating object of study, but we don’t have educational 
systems that make clear how essential bees are to everything else.  
Bees are critical pollinators. In their busy lives they pollinate 70 out of the 100 crops that make up 
90% of our food. And that is just for starters. They also pollinate the plants that animals eat (that we 
eat). And for dessert? It doesn’t take much imagination to imagine that wild consequences of losing 
such a central cog of the planet’s entire biosystem. In Chapter 8 on Physical Tipping Points, the focus 
was on physical Earth System cogs, such as the Jet Stream, the Amazon Rainforest and the AMOC. 
The wider truth is that these Earth System cogs have a parallel in the biosystems of the planet. The 
loss of bees would have massive consequences that would cascade through the entire flora and 
fauna of the planet (which includes the 8 billion human beings that it hosts).  
 
426 (a clue)  
