Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 346 
(BACK) 
 
The death sentence was delivered by a 
democratic vote.435  
In the picture on the right, Socrates is 
framed at his execution by the artist Jaques-
Louis David accepting the judgement of the 
people with his right hand and pointing to 
the truth with the other. It is an iconic 
picture of an iconic moment in human 
history. The fact that there are now 
thousands of fridge magnets and millions of 
postcards of that scene, should not 
undermine the poignancy of the moment.  
Much later in life, looking back to his youth, 
Plato writes these lines, “Eager as I had once 
been to go into politics, as I looked at these things and saw everything taking any course at all, with 
no direction or management, I ended up feeling dizzy”.  
This event snagged and ripped at Plato’s psyche for the rest of his life. It was a scene that could not 
be unseen. When Plato was a teenager, the Athenians, led by their egos and desires, had voted for 
disastrous war with the Spartans. Now in his twenties, with a crass regard for truth and justice, they 
had voted to put to death his remarkable teacher.  
After this double punch, it would have been understandable, and easy, for Plato to have just pulled 
away from the world. He was from a noble class; he could have led a very comfortable life without 
any concern or engagement for society and justice. However, he does the opposite.  
This determination and resolve to remain plugged into the civic world almost certainly had 
something to do with the example of Socrates himself. Namely, Socrates could have walked away 
from Athens at any moment prior to the trial. He knew the odds of a fair hearing were racked 
against him, and that the probable outcome of the vote would be his death. And yet, he stayed. 
Fundamentally, Socrates understood himself to be an Athenian. He was first and foremost a citizen.  
He declared at his trial that he would accept whatever they decided whether that meant freedom or 
death. It was simply his duty to put before the Athenians the justice of his cause.  
When we look at David’s iconic painting of Socrates’ death it is right to remember that Socrates was 
a remarkable martyr – for the truth. Our attention is naturally drawn to the finger pointing up at the 
truth. But the other, down-turned hand, reaching out to accept the hemlock, is equally important. 
This was an act of extraordinary courage and commitment to the civic community that he called 
home.   
 
 
 
 
435 Out of a jury of 501, the vote was likely 280 for his death, versus 221 against (‘The Apology of Socrates’, 
36a).   
Figure 60, The Death of Socrates (1787) Jacques-Louis Davide. 
Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York 
