Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 310 
(BACK) 
 
The Forms  
 
“The Allegory of the Cave” 
Plato, “Republic”, c375BC 
 
“Imagine prisoners that have spent their entire lives chained, deep inside a cave. They have been 
chained so that they cannot see behind themselves, and they are forced to stare endlessly at the cave 
wall in front of them. Behind them a fire is burning, and between the prisoners and the fire is a raised 
walkway. Now imagine that each day, a menagerie of objects crosses the walkway: animals, people 
carrying their wares to market… Their shapes create an intricate shadow-play on the wall in front of 
the prisoners. This is the only world that the prisoners have ever known: the shadows, and the echoes 
of unseen objects.  
Now imagine that a prisoner is released. After some time adjusting to the blinding light, the freed 
prisoner will begin to experience the world outside of the cave for the very first time. And it is like 
nothing like anything he could have ever imagined. With his new perception of the world the man 
would want to return to his friends to share his incredible discoveries.  
But the prisoners cannot recognise their old friend. He appears as all things do – his voice is a distorted 
echo and his body is a grotesque shadow. They cannot understand his fantastic stories of the world 
outside of the cave, to them, it will never exist. This of course does not make the world outside of the 
cave any less real.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This beautiful summary was written by Michael Ramsey.  
He also produced and directed a wonderful short animation of The Cave in clay.  
Further helpful little explanations of the cave can be found here and here.   
Questions 
• 
What parallels can you identify between the man who escapes the cave and yourself?  
• 
What could we understand the chains to represent in the climate crisis?  
• 
In Plato’s original, full version, the man who returns to the cave is eventually killed. Do you think 
Plato is exaggerating people’s resistance to new ideas?  
 
