Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 262 
(BACK) 
 
Elisabeth Kubler-Ross, a Swiss-American psychiatrist, famously developed the 5 stages of grief in her 
book, “On Death and Dying” (1969). The structure and pattern of the feelings provoked by climate 
anxiety are close those of experiencing grief.  
Like with the anguish suffered after the death of someone you love, the breakdown of climate 
equilibriums present themselves as massive, absolute realities, in front of which we find our puny 
little self. This profound lack of agency is an overwhelming truth to face.   
There are two aspects to this grief. Firstly, the background, diffuse sense of things not being as they 
should be. The odd, pervasive sense of strangeness. Then secondly, the particular shafts of anger 
about that loss.  
For those suffering after a death, divorce or other traumatic event, these moments of clarity can be 
triggered by the most mundane word or object, as a memory comes to the surface. And there is a 
parallel in climate anxiety, because the crisis is a fully systemic one; it affects everything, therefore 
almost anything can point to the underlying emergency.  
Denial  
In Kubler-Ross’ understanding, the first stage of grief is denial.  
It is easy to get stuck in this phase.  
Maybe your school has not provided you with an informed view about the system basics? Maybe 
your media and social media platforms are plugged into neo-liberal, fossil fuelled denialism? Climate 
change denial could easily just be part of your tribal beliefs. The fact that climate denialism is 
infantile and scientifically illiterate does not really change anything. This is nothing about facts. 
Identity and loyalty trump reality. This is a matrix that is truly difficult to get out of.  
The oil and gas industry is a close friend of neo-liberal economics. It has made that matrix of denial 
very comfortable and attractive. When you have $3bn every day in pure profits over the last 50 years, 
to spend in defence of your tribal interests, it becomes easier to understand how such a remarkably 
stupid response has been able to remain so popular and pervasive.356 Investing in disinformation and 
false narratives has been very a lucrative strategy. Indeed, a strategy that the IMF has calculated is 
still bolstered by $11m of state subsidies every minute (globally).357 Why face reality when it pays so 
much to ignore it?  
Alas, it could have been so different.  
Faced with scientific facts decades ago358, they chose to invest in denialism rather than alternative 
clean energy.359 Both would have been profitable, but the boards of fossil fuel companies took the 
 
356 The author of the research, Prof Aviel Verbruggen states that the total of $52tn accumulated by petro-
states and the fossil fuel industry since 1970 is enough to “buy every politician and every system”.  
https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2022/jul/21/revealed-oil-sectors-staggering-profits-last-50-years 
357 Ian W.H. Parry, Simon Black, Nate Vernon, “Still Not Getting Energy Prices Right: A Global and Country 
Update of Fossil Fuel Subsidies.” IMF Working Paper, September 24th 2021. 
358 “Cause for Concern” a film made by Shell in 1991 is a snapshot of the clarity that the fossil fuel industry had 
about the science and they were fully aware of the profoundly damaging effects greenhouse gases well before 
this date.  
359 In 1977, Marathon Oil published an article warning of “widespread starvation and other social and 
economic calamities” due to fossil fuelled, industrial growth. This is now evidence in a court case for damages 
 
