Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 204 
(BACK) 
 
work at a System 1 level (most notably, fear291). These political campaigns set up strong emotions 
against the powers of calculating bureaucracies and won. As the banners said, “Trump digs Coal”.    
 
The instincts beat the experts.  
 
If citizens were to act like rational scientists guided by System 2 level thinking, they would vote out 
of office any government that was failing to keep climate change within safe boundaries. A properly 
informed, open society of reasonable humans would self-regulate economic activity to make sure 
that the threshold of 2°C would not be overstepped.292  
 
However, it hardly needs to be said, we are evidently not just rational, ‘System 2’ level people. Our 
hospitals are full of smokers with self-inflicted cancer and heart disease, not orderly queues of 
robots waiting for a recharge. Kahneman won his Nobel Prize for Economics by articulating how 
people deviate from rational economic choices in various ways that undermine the assumptions of 
neo-classical economics.  
 
Dan Kahan  
 
Now from Dan Kahneman to Dan Kahan.  
 
This irrationality has got some significant consequences for how we talk about climate change.  
 
Recent psychological research by Professor Kahan has demonstrated how problematic a democratic 
solution to climate change will be. The conclusions of his paper, ‘What is the Science of Science 
Communication?’293 sharpens the picture of how System 1 and System 2 thinking might be at work 
with climate change.  His paper exposes how education will have to  find a much deeper level of 
traction than just presenting facts about the crisis.  
 
In order to understand Kahan’s work we have to 
pretend, for a brief moment, that people are rational. 
Within this outlook it follows that a higher level of 
scientific knowledge and skills will make people more 
perceptive of the risks of climate change. In the graph 
on the right, this is labelled the PIT prediction.  Within 
this model of thinking, those who are smarter, either 
by nature or by nuture, will better understand the 
risks of climate change. The “PIT prediction” is that 
those who are more numerate and better at technical 
reasoning, will be more concerned about climate 
change because they will have a more advanced 
understanding of the basic elements of the science 
and a better handle of the risk assessment. Within this 
model, the function of education would be to raise the standard of Maths and Science as far as 
possible so that the population’s view on climate change approaches the consensus of the scientists.  
 
291 One of the most psychologically insightful books of the 20th century was Erich Fromm’s “The Fear of 
Freedom” (1941).  
292 As explained in previous chapters the 1.5°C threshold is already effectively transgressed. We should 
continue the fight to slam the brakes on before we cross 2°C, and then turn our attention to the massive 
drawdown of GHG that would be required to get back under 1.5°C.  
293 Journal of Science Communication, Vol. 14, No. 3, 2015 
