Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 256 
(BACK) 
 
living within their borders, and those advances have been shared to a lesser extent with those 
peoples outside of their borders.  
 
These wealthy nations have the resources and responsibility to lead the rest of the world in the 
investments in innovation to get us out of the mess. They should be the ones that are investing 
massively in the innovation required for renewable infrastructure; especially in nuclear fusion and 
carbon capture, that actually work at a meaningful scale. They should be leading all the critical work 
in innovative low impact, durable products. Any qualms about the costs of these investments and 
innovations simply need put side by side with their historic emissions and extractions (and of course, 
the cost of not doing so).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
To finish, it is important to look at a summary of our planetary boundaries as described by the CUTx 
Numbers. But to look at them with innovation in mind in these 3 key respects.  
 
a) Leverage points  
 
Where do we need innovation? With climate change, we need it in the issues with leverage. The big 
stuff. Namely, nuclear fusion350 and carbon capture. If we could get these technologies to a 
functional scale, it would truly be transformative. Yet, governments are still massively subsidising 
fossil fuel (see Chapter 10) not research into nuclear fusion. And carbon capture technology is still a 
tiny toy (see Chapter 4) of the fossil fuel industry, that is waved about to distract us from aggressive 
policies to curb the burning of oil, coal and gas. If we held a properly enlightened view of the crisis, 
then we would be investing massive resources into these two areas and giving our innovators every 
chance to make a major breakthrough in those fields.  
  
However, these doesn’t fix the resource problem.  
 
b) Systems Entrepreneurship  
Rex Tillerson, former CEO of Exxon Mobil, once said, “Climate change is an engineering problem and 
has engineering solutions”.  
 
The data does not agree.  
 
We need a profound level of innovation at every level of society, not just one by our engineers. We 
need it in our education, in our economic models, in our legislation... The third pillar of the Climate 
Academy is named “Systems Entrepreneurship” not merely social entrepreneurship. It is delusional 
to imagine that public institutions alone could somehow nudge the private juggernaut of capitalism 
into a safe operating zone. We need innovation in the private and the public sphere, however, 
crucially, we need innovators of the full thing, the full system.  
 
We need systems entrepreneurs who play and innovate, to deconstruct and reconstruct.  
 
350 In an ideal world we would not be handling radioactive material, nor creating waste that lasts for millions of 
years. Nuclear power brings also brings nations closer to nuclear bombs. However, given the timeframes and 
the scale of the problem, this option simply cannot be ignored. 
