Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 139 
(BACK) 
 
problem as the exponential growth kicks in. A truth that political leaders did not easily grasp at the 
start of the COVID-19 pandemic.  
Indeed, the build-up of massive pressures on the planetary systems has happened as fast exponential 
growth. One of the best places to stand and look at the massive dimensions of the human impact on 
Earth is to look at the important dashboard developed by the Stockholm Resilience Centre220. The 
scientific curves that hook upwards dramatically from 1950 in “The Great Acceleration” illustrate so 
many of the pressure points that have developed.  The dashboard covers both the Earth System trends 
(from CO2 readings and ice melts to bio-diversity loss and ocean acidification) and Socio-Economic 
trends (from population growth and primary energy use to transportation expansion and fertilizer 
use).  
Yet the odd truth is that this growth has mostly happened in single digit annual increases - these 
seemingly unremarkable additions, when compounded on top of each other are hugely significant. 
Mathematics informs us that if something grows at 3.5% per year for 20 years, it would have doubled 
in size221. The surge in population and industrial activity since 1950 has therefore given us plenty of 
time to take the planetary systems to the brink of various tipping points. As Professor A.A. Bartlett 
bluntly (and repeatedly222) put it, “The greatest shortcoming of the human race is our inability to 
understand the exponential function.”  
As noted in the ‘The Absolute Basics’ (Module 1) the amount of extra energy in the atmosphere is now 
equal to 600,000 Hiroshima A-Bombs per day – and that does not include the monumental level of 
extra energy that has also been absorbed by the warming oceans. We have achieved something 
spectacular in a very unspectacular way. Indeed, policy decisions still seem to be operating in this blind 
spot - despite all the warnings of science, we are set to accelerate emissions further until at least 2030. 
It would be easy to consider that the increased emissions of 2.1%* in 2021, did not look like much to 
worry about. Yet the hard truth is that we are projected to match the entire emissions of human 
civilization up until now by the year 20__** with exponential growth rates such as these.  
A Tipping point – a close-up view 
We should really not be pushing the climate system into a situation where it is very tempted to flip. 
The danger we are now faced with is that the exponential growth in emissions can shift into a radically 
new gear, where that growth rate becomes unstoppably huge. The major concern that overhangs the 
climate crisis is that if one part of the climate system goes into breakdown mode, this destabilization 
will drag other major elements of the Earth* with it.    
But how do tipping points work? What are the smaller mechanics of the process?  
It is informative to have a brief look at something beautiful. Trees.  In the early summer of 2018 whilst 
driving south through Europe, it was very notable that the trees that edged the motorways were not 
their usual lush green. In fact, the scenery was dominated by yellows and bronzes, like a day in late 
October. It had been a truly odd year of weather, with prolonged periods of heat and drought. The 
heatwaves had caused havoc across the continent, and so now instead of driving past trees that should 
have been acting as a vacuum, sucking out CO2 from the atmosphere, they were just frazzled 
bystanders to human traffic. A situation that was not just happening in the fields of southern Europe; 
it was a situation replicated across swathes of Scandinavian arctic land.  
 
220 “The Trajectory of the Anthropocene: The Great Acceleration”, Anthropocene Review (16 January 2015) 
221 For the mathematically curious, the ‘Doubling Time’ for any percentage can be worked out with quite a 
simple equation.  
222 _ how many times -  
