Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 145 
(BACK) 
 
Conclusion 
 
How little things can make a big difference 
 
Ozone 
Prof. Paul Crutzen understood the dangers of entering into a minefield of tipping points. He knew 
what he was talking about. His work, “in atmospheric chemistry, particularly concerning the formation 
and decomposition of ozone” was recognized by the Nobel committee who awarded him the prize for 
Chemistry in 1995.239  
In 1976, Crutzen and his colleagues had discovered the rapidly depleting ozone layer; a set of 
observations that led to swift political action: the agreement of the Montreal Protocol (1987) just 11 
years later.   
Before his death in 2021, Crutzen frequently spoke out about the wider dangers of ‘The 
Anthropocene’. His groundbreaking work on the ozone layer had highlighted a critical lesson – a lesson 
about unforeseen consequences.  
Crutzen noted that humans had been extremely lucky with the fate of the ozone layer. Our global, 
industrial scale use of fluorocarbons had taken us close to the edge of an environmental catastrophe. 
The radical thinning of the ozone layer in the stratosphere had allowed the widespread invasion of 
ultraviolet radiation (UV) through to the surface of the Earth over Antarctica. Although ozone (O3) 
molecules only make up 0.00006% of the atmosphere, they stop 98% of the damaging UVB (and UVA) 
light penetrating and mangling up the DNA of living organisms. Although it is still damaged, with 
proper enforcement of the Montreal Protocol the ozone layer will eventually recover.    
But here is the twist.  
Our near-miss with the forces of nature was even closer and much more dramatic than most people 
think.  
In the earliest days of engineering with fluorocarbons, a choice was made to use 
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), and not their close relative, Bromofluorocarbons (BFCs). The chemical 
engineers making that decision did so on the basis of the different profiles of the substances relevant 
for manufacturing various products (such as fridges and aerosols).  
Unknowingly, we took the right choice for the stratosphere and avoided an absolutely catastrophic 
scenario. CFCs did damage the ozone layer, however, the much more aggressive BFCs would have 
blown an “ozone hole” in the stratosphere so big, and so fast, that we would have had almost no 
chance of knowing the damage we were causing until it was far too late.  
We threw the dice without really understanding what was at stake. We got lucky, but this example 
should act as an important lesson in modesty. 
Algae 
Indeed, it is rather demanding to keep a proper eye on all the key variables involved in climate change. 
The climate modelling of the cryosphere was significantly revised in 2012 when the widespread 
 
239 Shared with Maro Molina and Frank Sherwood Roland.  
