Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 318 
(BACK) 
 
c) The climate crisis and capitalism  
Indeed, the dynamics of the Adaptive Cycle can clearly be seen to be operative in the climate crisis.  
Before human beings had an Industrial Revolution and a Great Acceleration, the planet was an 
utterly remarkable place of biodiversity. Nested in this biosphere, and under a stable atmosphere, 
human society was also astonishingly diverse.  
What has happened in the last century has been breathtaking. Not only has one species come to 
dominate the planet; but one singular operating system of has taken over, namely: capitalism. And 
within this one system there are a rapidly shrinking number of controlling ‘nodes’ that control that 
system.  
There are innumerable layers of the crisis at a human level: Industry, politics, big media, social 
media, psychology, sociology, bureaucracy, policy, investments, banking, insurance, agriculture, 
transport, mining, (etc). They have all coalesced towards a certain set of priorities, into similar 
patterns of choices, all of which are dominated by capitalist, market imperatives. Those companies, 
organisations, sectors, individuals, oligarchs, cartels, multinationals (etc), that have established 
capital inevitably use that asset power to gain wider control of other layers of the world.  
A feedback loop is in play, with capital at the centre.  
This is where the real action is. This is the systemic hub of our problem. It is the centre of gravity 
from which all the different arms of the crisis spiral away from.  
Capitalism has been the main driver of climate change, and it will continue to be so in the absence 
of any limits to growth.  
Capitalism, without robust boundaries in place to protect the ‘externalities’, has pushed the natural 
world to the edge of a minefield of tipping points. It is crazy to even write about the atmosphere and 
biosphere as if they were somehow external, or marginal to our economy. But this is typical of how 
invasive capital has become to our frames of reference.  
It needs to be very clearly stated that this critique of capital and capitalism has got nothing to do 
with Karl Marx or any of the ruinous, totalitarian Marxist regimes of history. Not all critics of 
capitalism want to install dictatorships of suffocating misery. Not all criticisms of capitalism are 
preliminary moves on the global chessboard towards violent revolutions.  
Why do so many people jump into a highly defensive stance when capitalism is criticized? Why do 
we have to pretend that the only alternative to deregulated capitalism is a Marx flavoured tyranny? 
Why is capitalism defended with such dogmatism? Is not entirely reasonable to just observe and 
map out the negative consequences of capitalist market forces?  
 
 
