Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 92 
(BACK) 
 
Introduction 
 
What on Earth is going on?  
The Keeling Curve has plotted out the rising zigzag of CO2 level every day since 1958 to an accuracy 
of one part per billion.131 So by the late 1980s, when the level of greenhouse gases in the 
atmosphere had been ratcheting upwards for decades, it was normal for humans to be rather 
curious about the cause of such a dangerous phenomenon. Like you would be curious to see if 
anyone was actually driving the double-decker bus that was heading out of control towards your 
face. 
It was fundamentally important to understand the cause of climate change. What was responsible 
for such an acceleration? Could such a thing be stopped?  
The answer to this puzzle was not that difficult to work out for the scientists looking at the data132. 
But that didn’t stop a huge range of people joining in the fun at trying to have a guess about what 
was happening. Some of these guesses have stretched the limits of our biological status as homo 
sapiens.  
For example, in 2012 a Fox News metrologist Joe Bastardi (the clue is in the name)133 claimed that 
CO2 doesn’t mix in the atmosphere134, that there was no known link between CO2 and global 
warming135, and that the whole idea of climate change was not compatible with Newton’s First Law 
of Thermodynamics136. An interesting set of claims, as they seem to confirm the existence of 
zombies in the USA, and that these zombies have even reached a level of integration into human 
society that can take them into influential positions on national news stations.    
Indeed, shame on the BBC too. They have also continually put different flavours of climate change 
deniers onto their mainstream radio and TV coverage. Worse, they did it in the name of “balance”. 
An unforgivable level of naivety about what the world ‘balance’ means for an institution that prides 
itself on “Intelligent Speech” (Radio 4) and counts numerous Oxbridge graduates amongst its staff. 
Such a basic level of misunderstanding is a bit like having an elephant sat at one side of a seesaw and 
then attempting to place a goofy set of plastic garden gnomes at the other, just to make it look like 
you are trying to level things up.  
Yet despite the monumental weight and range of evidence that points to human responsibility for 
climate change, these odd, deep fake ideas persist in both the media and also in schools.  
 
131 Although the results are published to an accuracy of one part per million, because having too many zeros in front of 
your eyes makes it more difficult for the brain to see things clearly.  
132 Human caused climate change was already nailed down in this paper by Keeling and Pales back in 1965, "The 
Concentration of Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide in Hawaii". Journal of Geophysical Research. 70 (24): 6053-
6076. Bibcode:1965JGR....70.6053P. doi:10.1029/JZ070i024p06053.  
133 Nobody who has a degree in Metrology from Penn State University could possibly be so scientifically illiterate without 
allowing his brain cells to be sponsored by the fossil fuel industry.   
134 It does. 
135 There is. (This was established by Eunice Newton Foote in 1856; cf. Chapter One “The Absolute Basics” for details) 
136 Where do you even start with this?  
