Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 356 
(BACK) 
 
These skills are often developed during the Climate Academy programme because it is a 
transdisciplinary project, during which the students are not sitting behind desks. Yes, the first phase 
of the Academy reveals the systemic problems through the reading of this book, plus any extra 
research that this inspires. However, the second pillar of the Academy mobilises students into the 
world as agents of change.  
When the friction and the flows of bringing these truths out into the open kick in, the student needs 
a set of leadership skills to navigate their way forward. Whilst it is instinctive to imagine leadership 
as something that involves managing a team, but this is not necessarily the case, there are so many 
diverse and powerful ways to show leadership.  
Underneath this map of key skills there are a set of virtues in play. The climate crisis requires young 
people to be courageous, resilient, patient, creative, responsible, empathetic and humble. And as 
Plato so fully understood, the practice of these virtues is what makes someone fully human. The 
development of virtues brings true well-being.  
Indeed, young people who demonstrate the leadership might well turn out to be part of that 3.5% 
that inspire and transform our society to exit from the crazy crisis.  
 
Advocate for Laws  
Finally, to return one last time to Plato’s original project. The Academy in Athens was designed to 
educate the future legislators of the state. Their laws would be informed by the love for justice and 
truth that had been instilled into their hearts and minds during their years in the Academy.  
The Climate Academy has been designed to stand in direct line with this tradition.442  
If someone was to ask a student what the central civic cause of the Climate Academy community 
members was – it would be the implementation of just laws to secure a stable, sustainable future. 
These laws would be characterized by:  
• 
A commitment to every individual’s equal right to the atmosphere and resources.  
• 
A respect for the all the planetary boundaries.  
o These boundaries for the climate and for biodiversity are clearly defined by the CUTx 
Index.  
Indeed, the overall aim of our civic engagement is to point at the fundamental importance of laws, 
and absurd absence of them in our current situation.  
Laws are the invisible matrix of our systems. They are arguably the only game in town that has 
sufficient leverage to achieve systemic change. They are arguably the only ‘circuit breaker’ with 
enough capacity to truly achieve the results we need.   
The vast majority of educational, political and media coverage of the crisis is focused on individual 
actions. These are important first steps. But they are profoundly limited, and we need to be both 
modest and ambitious enough to accept that.  Modest because it is not comfortable to realise that 
 
442 Unlike Plato, the Academy does not have any ambitions whatsoever to replace democratic rule. Indeed, 
even Plato himself in the last book he wrote (‘Laws’) seems open to democracy.  
 
