Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 46 
(BACK) 
 
enough room for anyone to swing a kitten in. Indeed, that one square metre is not just the place 
where you get to stand and swing a kitten, it is also the land out of which you need to get all your 
food and water, the land on which you build your house, the land on which  factories and shops are 
built, along with the motorways and roads that link them up… If you want to build some of those 
things elsewhere, then you really have a problem because everyone has only got one square metre.  
 
This is, of course, an absurd situation, and one that we could never find ourselves in. There could 
never be such a population density because there is a date, much earlier than that, at which the 
Earth (as a closed mass system) will not be able to support the number of people that live on it. This 
is a real date. It is a real limit.  
 
Just because this date is not known because of all the complex variables that go into population 
growth and Earth life support systems, it does not change the fact that with continued growth, at 
some point the human population will hit its limit.. Indeed, well before that limit things would not 
yet be impossible but would be very stressed.  
 
To help visualise where we are up to, it is better to think, not in square metres, but in football 
pitches.  In 1990, when your parents were about your age, if the surface of the Earth was divided up 
into regular blocks of land, then everyone would have had about 4 football pitches to live off. In 
2022 that area is down to a little more than two and a half football fields63.  
 
 
Just like the astronauts have to give very careful consideration to their space in Space, we Earthlings 
must do the same.    
 
Questions 
 
1. Why do we struggle to see that the planet has limits?  
2. If you could reorganise your football pitch, what would you change? 
3. If you were an astronaut on this spaceship, with one “non-essential” object, what would it 
be? 
 
 
 
63 Total above sea land surface on Earth: 148.3 million square km (FAOSTAT0. World population data: UN 
World Population Prospects, 2019 revision. 
