Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 141 
(BACK) 
 
Indeed, the Paris Agreement (2015), committed all the nations of the world to limit warming to well 
below 2°C (and as close as possible to 1.5°C). This agreement was informed by an understanding of 
the macro analysis - that the higher the temperature gets, the higher the risk is that the destabilization 
becomes contagious and unstoppable. Indeed, without diminishing the importance of the localized 
impacts of climate change, it is this global, existential threat that climate change carries which lies at 
the heart of the whole crisis.  
As a very rough summary indeed: the corals of the Great Barrier Reef cannot endure a rise of 1.5°C 
and many glaciers will be doomed with a 2°C rise. As we just noted, the Boreal Biome (and Amazon 
rainforest) is under threat to tip at 3°C; and at 4°C the startling amount of methane in the permafrost 
is at risk of irreversible destabilisation229. A world heated to an average of 5°C or 6°C would be 
unrecognizable to us, and utterly hostile to human life. A full and properly qualified account of these 
different stages of disruption can be found in the award-winning book, “6 Degrees” by Mark Lynas.  
There are very few scientific scenarios where any touching of a 4°C rise does not signal a irreversible 
destabilization. A rise of 2°C sustained over centuries also makes the risk of wider contagion and 
irreparable damage likely.  
Qualifications 
Now for some of those essential qualifications of the science - there are five major points to underline.  
Firstly, as just indicated, there is also a huge difference between sustaining a 2°C temperature rise for 
50 years and holding it for 500 years.  
Secondly, any summary that captures scenarios for “2°C” or “3°C” is immediately simplistic. There is 
of course a huge difference between 3.1°C and 3.9°C that cannot be accounted for at the level of zoom 
that this book has.  
Thirdly, once a temperature triggers a major system change, even if the temperature is then later 
reduced, the chain of events will not go into reverse as it has passed its tipping point.  
(from Steffan et al, 2018). 
 
229 If all the methane locked inside the clathrates of the artic were to be unlocked it is calculated that such a 
thawing would cause greenhouse gas levels to jump by 1460-1600 gigatonnes. Such a seismic event would 
roughly double the level of GHGs in the atmosphere. (IPCC, Summary Report for Policy Makers 2019).   
