Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 63 
(BACK) 
 
 
So from this clear central point a proper vantage point is established to look forwards and measure 
the commitments on the table, and pathways that we are on. Without this base established, how 
could anybody clap or boo a statement given by the UN or by a national government about its latest 
commitment. For the moment there is a rather improbable situation where phrases like “a new 
ambitious target” can be used without any reference to the remaining carbon budget. It would be 
genuinely uplifting to be able to applaud robust action and it is simple principle of democracy that we 
should also be able to identify where actions that fall short.  
 
WHERE ARE GOING? 
 
The Emissions Gap 
We are speeding towards these carbon budget limits. However, we need to have a clearer view of 
what lies ahead. Maybe if we start to push the brakes hard enough, we could stop before those lines? 
Our efforts in the past have not managed to curve the trend downwards, but perhaps there is brighter 
news ahead? There is a continual flow of new commitments from different nations, and it is important 
to know if we need to applaud them or not. Module 5 will get into the details for each country, in 
Module 4 (here) things will be kept at a global level.  
Unfortunately, the commitments made so far fall a long way short. The policies and action that are 
required to get “well below 2°C” are still distant. This shortfall is known as ‘The Emissions Gap’.89 In 
Paris (COP21), all the nations of the world agreed to put forward their NDCs towards stabilising GHG 
in the atmosphere. An NDC is a “Nationally Determined Contribution”, it is a non-binding declaration 
of intent by a country towards the climate crisis. There are few minor exceptions to this. Most 
interestingly, Nicaragua neither offered an NDC, nor did it sign the Paris Agreement with everyone 
else. This was not because of some delusional leader, but, rather nobly, it was because they simply 
wanted to point out the size of the emissions gap and they wanted to protest about the lack of serious 
action.  
Indeed, when all of the NDCs are added up, and assuming that every nation will follow through on 
the commitments that they have made, humanity is still heading for a climate that is projected to be 
an intolerable 3-4°C warmer.  
 
This can be seen in the two blue sections on the graph below: the upper dark blue area represents 
the current policy commitments, and the lower lighter blue represents the pathway if current 
targets are met. It might be the case that nations enter into a positive feedback loop with policy 
making once public opinion swings firmly behind climate action, but it is also true that nations can 
emphatically swing the opposite direction, such as with the USA under Trump and Brazil under 
Bolsonaro. 
 
89 UNEP (2019) The Emissions Gap Report 2019, United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) Nairobi, figure 3.1. 
