Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 237 
(BACK) 
 
 
 
What this means is that it really doesn’t matter what kind of car you buy. In the bluntest terms, any 
car has a major impact on the planet. And what is true for a car, is true right across the economy.  
 
Innovation has to be seen in this context.  
 
Innovation does not have magical powers to avoid the laws of physics and chemistry, a product has 
to be made from something, and that something comes from the surface of the Earth or the process 
of making it involves an extraction from there. Every time. 
 
Jason Hickel writes, “Keep in mind that every ton of material stuff that’s extracted from the earth 
comes with an impact on the planet’s living systems. Ramping up the extraction of biomass means 
razing forests and draining wetlands. It means destroying habitats and carbon sinks. It means soil 
depletion, ocean dead zones and overfishing. Ramping up the extraction of fossil fuels means more 
carbon emissions, more climate breakdown and more ocean acidification. It means more mountain 
top removal, more offshore drilling, more fracking and more tar sands. Ramping up of extraction of 
ores and construction materials means more open-cast mining, with all the down-stream pollution 
that entails, and more cars and more ships and more buildings that demand yet more energy. And all 
this entails more waste, more landfills in the countryside, more toxins in our rivers, and more 
plastics in the sea. According to the United Nations, material extractions and processing is 
responsible for 90% of total global biodiversity loss327. In fact, scientists often use material footprint 
as a proxy for ecological damage itself.”328  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Again, the car is just an example here. But it helps focus on a detail to understand the wider, more 
abstract picture. Indeed, the words “Sustainable Development” should only be spoken if the person 
 
327 International Resource Panel (IRP), “Global Resources Outlook” (UNEP, 2019).  
328 p102, Jason Hickel, “Less is More. How degrowth will save the world”. Penguin, 2022. 
