Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 57 
(BACK) 
 
 
Introduction 
VITAL STATISTICS 
 
A fit and healthy baby that enters the world kicking and crying can score nine or a maximum 10 in the 
‘AGPAR Test’ which is measured by doctors at birth.  
It was much too quiet when my son was born.  
He only scored a one. Fortunately, the specialist 
neonatal intensive care unit was just upstairs. In close, 
rapid step with a team of nurses and doctors I carried 
his tiny, feebly spasmodic little frame to the warm 
safety of an incubator. There, he was swiftly hooked to 
multi-coloured tubes and wires. This technology 
would feed him and continually measure and monitor 
all of his body’s key indicators, 24 hours a day. Over 
the next weeks, the ward was busy with general 
checks and moments of paperwork, close family 
visitors were ushered in during the afternoons. 
Sometimes, behind portable green curtains, key 
surgery was carried out. But in the reverential 
atmosphere of the unit, one thing was always familiar 
- the background chimes of the monitors that kept watch over every baby’s vital statistics. If the 
oxygen level in their blood dropped below a certain level, the digital numbers would turn blue, a small 
light would flash, and the tone of a slow ticking chime would start to accelerate and rise in pitch. 
Someone in a medical uniform would then appear to make the right adjustments.  
 
Thibault pulled through. On the day of his discharge from the hospital, I took a moment with a coffee 
in the bar downstairs and thumbed through a copy of ‘The Economist’. After skim-reading the articles 
on ‘Orban versus the intellectuals’ and ‘Zuma versus his people’, I absentmindedly reached the back 
pages. Here, all of the vital statistics of the global economy were presented.  
The data on these ‘Economic and Financial Indicator’ pages show all the key signals from around the 
world, from the Greek GDP to the Columbian CPI, and from the rates of Belgian Bonds to the value of 
the Russian Ruble. The Nikkei 225 and the CAC 40 are monitored alongside the movements in the 
dollar price of Gold and West Texas Intermediate Oil. These indices can control the social and political 
weather - a drop in the price of oil had given a boost to the profit margins of the Pirelli in Italy, but it 
was causing social unrest in Venezuela. The long-term unemployment data in France and the UK had 
swollen the numbers of voters on the political edge, especially towards the Right.  
However, Thibault was born into a world in which there was no fundamental index to measure our 
progress with climate change. This remains true today. In the pages of ‘The Economist’ there was no 
tracker of how many gigatonnes of carbon we could safely emit before our whole economic system is 
placed into a situation in which all economic activity will be critically undermined. There was no clear 
index of the good, the bad and the ugly for emissions and resource consumption.  
