Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 157 
(BACK) 
 
only five minutes late!” she protested. “I just forgot to lock the door”, he yelled. Simple mistakes, 
forgivable mistakes, but not if they push things over a stable threshold. Tipping points are a typical 
feature of any complex system. Relationships certainly are complex – but perhaps surprisingly, we 
can find tipping points occurring in the minds and commitments of a community of people who are 
well known for their reasonableness, their sensible and methodical approach to things: Scientists.   
Scientific Revolutions 
Science fully deserves its reputation for reliable knowledge. It has robust methods and exacting 
standards that test any truth claim made under its name. It is built on a firm foundation of evidence 
and reasoning. No time need be spent in categorical defence of their methods and results. 
Yet, an attentive look at how the history of science has moved forward reveals a messier story. The 
rather bumpy road of scientific history, mirrors many of the dynamics of human and social 
relationships that have just been identified. It has disagreements, knotted problems, and tipping 
points where the consensus of belief suddenly shifts.   
This unpredictable story does not invalidate the conclusions that scientists have arrived at, but that 
non-linear history has some valuable lessons for anyone who invests a little time to look at it more 
closely.  
Our expert guide in this area will be the American Philosopher of Science, Thomas Kuhn.  
Thomas Kuhn  
The publication of Kuhn’s work, “The Structure of Scientific Revolutions” 
(1962), caused a radical rethink in how we understand the development of 
science. His groundbreaking work challenged our common sense 
understanding of things – namely, that the story of our scientific past is one 
of a smooth, linear progression. Kuhn exposed how erratic, and sometimes 
irrational, the development of scientific awareness is. 
He describes the history of science characterised by two different types of 
activity, periods of “Normal Science” and periods of “Revolutionary Science”. 
He noted how science has long periods of settled research that are 
punctuated by sudden spasms and convulsions in which fundamental 
assumptions are overturned.  
These spasmodic moments of crisis, of short bursts of “Revolutionary Science”, can happen because 
the pressure of evidence or the number of glitches with the old system just becomes too great. An 
old paradigm of understanding can dramatically buckle under the weight of results and anomalies 
that just cannot be reconciled to fit the background assumptions253.  
 
253 Scientific revolutions can also occur from a sudden shock to the system without a build-up of pressure. For 
example, the astonishing genius of Albert Einstein caused a profound convulsion in Physics with the  four 
papers he published in 1905. Seemingly out of nowhere, with the most audacious act of imagination, he utterly 
reimagined the nature of time and space. A shift into “Revolutionary Science” mode could also be triggered by 
a deeply unusual observation that abruptly cracks previously held assumptions. For example, the OPERA 
 
Figure 24, Thomas Kuhn 
