Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 119 
(BACK) 
 
stuck between two rocks. And even if we do look, it is very difficult to think through the situation we 
are in all the way to its logical conclusion because it is so alarming.  
However, mainstream science is unambiguous, it states that we simply cannot keep doing what we 
do.  
There are various estimates for how expensive the U-turn towards a regenerative green economy 
would be. Perhaps it would cost as much as a finger? Maybe it would cost half and arm, or a whole 
leg? Yet, whatever the cost, any figure stated needs to be compared with the cost of not doing it. It 
is common for politicians to describe their latest climate pledges as “ambitious”. However, it would 
not have been “ambitious” for Aron Ralston to commit himself to sawing just a bit of his arm off. He 
needed to saw it off completely  in order to escape and survive.  
One step away from the action there is a bizarre reluctance by the media to ask the obvious 
question “are our commitments enough?” An announcement of a new climate pledge by a country is 
always accepted as good. Given the fact that most pledges improve the previous one, this is not a 
false reaction. However, it should not be the only reaction.  
The media analysis that follows is almost always limited to three standard types of enquiry: first,, the 
media question if the new commitment is ‘doable’ (even if not doing it is “suicidal”197). Secondly, if 
the new policy is implemented, which industries are likely to suffer the most (even if the 
investments required will generate wealth elsewhere)? And thirdly, once the pledge becomes a part 
of the status quo, the only question that gets asked is “are nations fulfilling their commitment?” 
(Even if it is utterly inadequate in the first place).  
 
 
average). It requires statistical mapping of probabilities to justify why any one event should be understood as 
part of the trends of climate change.  
197 Antonio Guterres, speaking at Stockholm+50. 2nd June 2022. (https://unric.org/en/guterres-at-
stockholm50-end-the-suicidal-war-against-nature/) 
