Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 112 
(BACK) 
 
There are evidently multiple features and dimensions to the climate crisis, but if we were to ask 
“what is the primary problem”? Is there a better answer than capitalism? Is there an answer that 
even gets close?  
These are not words written by a Marxist (that knee-jerk 
reaction to any criticism of capitalism is the result of decades of 
social conditioning).190 Even the most casual glance at Planet 
Earth would notice the near universal coverage that capitalism 
has attained. It does not require much imagination to 
anticipate that an economic system that keeps the 
environment as external to its thinking would tacitly allow the 
Anthropocene to blister holes in the biosphere and destabilise 
the atmosphere. It is simply impossible to look at the 
Anthropocene without recognizing the fundamental role played 
by capitalism. To ignore such a fact would be the weirdest kind 
of blinkered dogmatism.  
Those with a dogmatic fixation on trusting the markets to solve 
everything can be spotted quickly in public, because they 
repeatedly and clumsily use of the word “growth”. It is like 
their mantra.  
 
“Growth”, “Growth”, “Growth” is the constant drum beat that 
all government policy is a servant to. It is such a dominant and 
insistent beat that there is not even any space to ask the most 
basic questions about it. Such as, “what kind of growth?”, “for 
who?”, “for what purpose?” and “at what cost?”. Indeed, it would 
be a profanity to put forward the idea that we might actually need “degrowth”.  
The closed priorities of capitalism and its unremitting demand for material growth evokes the 
symbol of the Biblical “Molok” (or Moloch) - a Canaanite deity to which all things were sacrificed. 
Indeed, in most references to the Molok it even demanded child sacrifices. Often portrayed with a 
bull’s head, with outstretched arms over a fire, the idol was outlawed in the strictly monotheistic 
community of Israelites… but this didn’t stop some weaker leaders giving into the temptation to 
make their own sacrifices to it. Yet, worship of the Molok idol in the Biblical accounts, always ends 
badly for those who fall under its sway.  
Some might find this pointing of the finger at “The Age of Capital” (Hobsbawm) too severe. 
However, the imperatives of capitalism go far beyond a few cheesy advertising slogans that we must 
 
190 For a wonderfully measured and incisive account of how inequality is profoundly endemic to 
capitalism, you could ask Thomas Piketty to explain his ideas; or read his book, “Capital in the 
Twenty First Century” (2013). He is categorically not a Marxist. His “bulldozer of a book” (Laurent 
Mauduit) is a “magnificent sweeping meditation on inequality” (Paul Krugman). Piketty underlines 
the reality that unless capitalism is framed or cropped by state intervention, it will eventually gobble 
up everything in its path. This would include democracy and the natural world.  
 
Figure 19, 18th century depiction of the 
Moloch idol. "The idol Moloch with seven 
chambers or chapels", from Johann 
Lund's “Die Alten Jüdischen Heiligthümer” 
(1711, 1738). 
