Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 130 
(BACK) 
 
The climate crisis is a profoundly systemic one. It simply cannot be understood in fragmented, 
atomised pieces and it certainly cannot be solved with individual, incoherent actions. Systemic 
problems require systemic responses.  
Fortunately, there is an invisible matrix which frames all our economic and social reality, that can pull 
our actions to the level of change required: the law. Laws are the abstract structure to all our lives and 
at this late stage in the crisis they seem to be the singular most effective way to leverage our response 
with the energy and grip that can pull us up square to the science. What else could provide the 
framework needed? What else could act with the same cohesive and multi-dimensional power? How 
else can we get out of the “rigidity trap” (cf. Chapter 12) and achieve a system wide regeneration?  
If clear boundaries are set it will trigger many levels of innovation and restoration that we would love 
to see around the globe. The slow crawl of establishing sufficient emission reductions by voluntary 
consent has failed to achieve any meaningful progress so far. As the CUTx Index shows, the trends 
over the last 25 years are mostly for nations to increase their emissions. It is clearly the time to take 
our climate thinking and action to the next level.  
The details of this legal depth to the Climate Academy project will be more fully explored in the final 
chapter. But it is worth underlining the fact that the CUTx Index is designed to show the data at a 
national level for good reason. This is because nations are the law-making units. It is also the level at 
which the strongest legal, psychological, media and social forces operate. For example, we are easily 
triggered by national news events that are reported in the media with a sensitivity to the particular 
history and characteristics of our nations. It offers a manageable level of imagination and divides the 
budget into equitable blocks. Perhaps most importantly, national legal systems are also far more 
developed than those that are emerging in international law. 
  
Climate Academy 
 
This textbook is written for the Climate Academy, and this is the middle chapter of 14. It is arguably 
the most important chapter of the book because it presents the first ambition of the Academy (a 
systemic understanding of the climate crisis) in its starkest, numerical terms. These numbers are what 
it all comes down to in the end, both for humanity and for the Academy. The CUTx Index is rightly the 
essential science that all activities of the Academy revolve around.  
Just like the concentrations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere are the critical measure of 
whatever climate actions we take, so the understanding and dissemination of these numbers is the 
defining mark of what the Academy does. Just like an economy and a society can flourish if a safe and 
stable environment is in place, so all the creative and artistic skills of the students can thrive in bringing 
these numbers into the world.  
It is so odd that a simple climate index does not exist already. It is so odd that education is so far 
behind the curve with the crisis.  
There are all kinds of environmental initiatives and projects happening in schools which all have an 
important value. But how many of these are framed by the core, systemic problem of the carbon 
budget? How many projects at upper secondary level are focused on plastics and recycling which have 
a minimal effect on that budget?  How many are informed by the clarity provided by the CUTx Index? 
Does any government in the world have an educational programme that extends a student’s 
understanding of the crisis beyond what could be understood at Primary School level?  
