Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 177 
(BACK) 
 
The great Elizabethan songwriter John Dowland wrote lamentingly, “Must I praise the leaves, when 
no fruit I find?”.267 His experience of love would have been a good preparation for reading most 
school policies and programmes on sustainability.  
It is a truly daunting and difficult task for any student to invite their school to move into the critical 
higher gears of climate change education. How do you offer a critique of people’s earnest efforts 
with the heavy truth that it does not touch upon the main problems? How does a young person 
speak with authority about such things to people who are far older and who should be much wiser? 
Schools, like so many other sectors of society, are engaged in so many diverse green initiatives that 
are worthy of endorsement, but it nearly always pushes away any space to actually get some 
traction with the core issues.  
Any voice that questions a status quo that appears to be working will seem painfully shrill268.  
The same tricky social dynamics are most evidently in play at the annual COP meetings which were 
started by the UNFCCC in 1995 with one singular goal in mind, “to stabilize the concentration of 
greenhouse gases to prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the atmosphere” (Article 
2). Since then, the UNFCCC has promoted myriad promises and a kaleidoscopic range of initiatives – 
yet they have never eyeballed the central problem, the accelerating emissions.  
If these meetings have never clearly addressed the fundamental, systemic drivers of the problem, 
what do we say in response? Do we clap? Do we praise the little, knowing it is not a lot? Chapter 5 
has all the details.  
In both a secondary school and at COP, and indeed in 
any situation, the proximity of the tipping points that 
we face necessitates boldness and clarity in our 
assessment of what we are actually doing.   
Is there a national government anywhere in the world 
that has an official programme of education that 
provides a clear view of the depth and dimensions of 
the problem? It is simply extraordinary that in the face 
of an existential crisis the scale of which has never been 
seen before, we have been content to shuffle around 
various clichés and superficial responses without ever 
facing up properly to the conclusions of mainstream science.  
We have left our young people on the brink of an ecological 
catastrophe by patronising them with mild, fragmented, and incoherent coverage of the situation. 
And the fact that this paragraph might feel a bit tense or even alarmist to some readers reflects the 
wider truth that our media and our public leaders have failed to square up to the truth too.     
 
267 John Dowland, “Can She Excuse My Wrongs” (1597)  First Booke of Songes or Ayres (Peter Short, London).  
268 This textbook is written for students, but there is sharp message in here for teachers. The “Fridays For 
Future” movement, amongst other impulses, has led to the peculiar situation in which students have a better 
instinctive grasp of an issue; sometimes are they also better informed. We need to stand alongside them. As 
teachers, we need to help them speak and innovate with the necessary tact, urgency and strength.  
 
Figure 31, Cartoon by Carl Jonsson, Climate 
Academy graduate 2016. 
