Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 351 
(BACK) 
 
students teach lessons, write publications, make speeches, create media content, protest, 
anything – the CUTx Index provides the stamp of authority on what they are saying.  
 
The numbers of the index will affirm what they claim to be rooted in science. The numbers 
enable them to call out misinformation with clarity. In all the diversity of activities that 
Academy students engage in, in all the kaleidoscopic angles to the crisis that they can deal 
with, the CUTx Index gives The Climate Academy a crucial level of continuity and coherence.    
 
In just two numbers each nation can know what it needs to do to avoid a crash with the 
forces of nature. As fully explained in the pivotal Chapter 7 on the CUTx Index, all the current 
commitments to reduce emissions made by the nations of the world have got nothing to do 
with science. They have nothing to do with the carbon budget, and they are impossibly foggy 
to understand.  
How long will we tolerate being on board a democratic ship that has no idea of where it is, 
and where it is going?  
We managed to create dashboards for the COVID epidemic in a matter of weeks. The 
government provided regular updates on infection rates, the number of empty hospital 
beds, and they kept in place some tough laws to protect their citizens – laws that tracked the 
scientific data.  
Attentive to the rise and fall of the numbers, the media scrutinized the government’s 
response. What on Earth are we doing without such an index?  
The central task of the Climate Academy is to put these numbers out clearly into the public 
space. Both in order to raise understanding of their significance and to simply ask why they 
are not used as a global standard.  
 
e) Be a citizen not just a consumer  
The overwhelming majority of climate projects in school leave the fundamentals of the crisis 
untouched. The DNA of these projects have the print of a consumer culture, in the sense that they 
invite students to consume less (less meat, less litter, less planes, less waste, less plastic). The 
