Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 277 
(BACK) 
 
Those with ecological anxiety understand that this stability and order is not necessarily permanent. 
Like Tennyson himself observed in one of the most quoted stanzas of this poem:  
 
“Who trusted God was love indeed 
   And love Creation’s final law — 
   Tho’ Nature, red in tooth and claw 
With ravine, shriek’d against his creed —“ 
(Canto LVI)  
Indeed, very soon after the publication of “In Memoriam” (1850) Darwin would put forward his 
theory of Natural Selection. The publication of “On the Origin of Species” (1859) would trigger 
profound shockwaves along the fault lines exposed by Lyell’s Geology. Darwin’s evolutionary Biology 
had grievous implications for how people understood the natural world. From being a benign garden 
of Eden, crafted thoughtfully by the loving hand of God, the world suddenly appeared as alien and 
hostile, blind to human life and purposes.  
It was competitive out there. It was a fight for survival. Why would God install risk and randomness 
as a fundamental rule of his creation? Why would God play such dangerous games with us? It was 
difficult to square the shriek of nature with the belief in a kind and caring God.   
Conclusion  
We can understand why Doctor Plot didn’t understand what he was looking at when he found that 
big bone. Likewise, if schools and the media are not presenting the fuller view of the climate crisis, 
then the public will be prone to misunderstanding the relevance of different climate change facts, 
events, and details.  
Just like it took many decades for the implications of the new science of Lyell and Darwin to fully 
embed itself into public awareness, so we are still rather stuck in a limited public understanding of 
climate science. We still tend to see big human bones, not dinosaur bones.  
Happily, those who suffer from climate anxiety understand this bigger systems context well. Those 
with ecological anxiety, are edgy because they have an edge.  
Yes, it is profoundly disorientating to discover that we are entering into a new geological era, but 
those who “get it” can act as the funky tour guides to this strange new world. They can open up new 
levels of reality, simply by pointing at some graphs and deploying some key metaphors.  
Apart from the wider social value of advancing climate literacy, being able to transform someone’s 
understanding of the world is an immediately powerful and psychologically rewarding thing to do. 
This boost to well-being is particularly valuable, because a key feature of ecological angst is the deep 
lack of agency that arises from confronting the Super-Wicked proportions of the crisis. Delivering a 
talk or an article, a podcast or a peer-to-peer lesson…, is empowering.  
In the act of writing poetry, there is unique potency too. It is a form of writing that enables the 
writer to take centre stage in a playful, oblique and creative way. Given that the climate crisis is so 
irreducibly complex and paradoxical, poetry is an art form that has a capacity to handle this.  The 
slow craft of stitching words, the ambition to find the universal in the particular, the digging into the 
