Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 267 
(BACK) 
 
industry to pump millions into hard denialism (made most vocal by the far right), when the BBC is 
website is functioning at such a trivial, zombified level.  
Is it really possible that nobody was triggered by the absurd insignificance of the action? Was there 
no flinch by someone in the editing team who understands the basic system truths of the science? 
Where was the analysis? The proportional framing? Where was the simple question that would have 
illuminated the farcical level of the action by a head of State?  
The BBC could have just saved money by writing “blah blah blah blah” as the text.  
This example from the BBC is not unusual at all. It has been picked simply because it is in the news 
today. It is a dot of news, and there have been thousands of dots like it, and there will be thousands 
of dots like it in the future.  
It is justified to be angry about this. It is justified to shout.  
Climate Protests 
Once the wide gap between the science and the social reality has been seen, it cannot be unseen. 
Indeed, it takes a long time to adjust to living in that doubleness because, it will keep reappearing at 
the different moments and at different levels.  
Coming to a full understanding of the science is like being thrown into another world – where the 
everyday comments by people, the commentary on the news, or just the sheer lack of reaction, 
takes on an extraordinary strangeness. We should not try to reconcile ourselves to this extreme 
dissonance. It should be held in place. (Like this short extract of music.)  
Simply to affirm that the dissonance is real is a healthy thing to do. It is important to put words on it 
for ourselves. It is important to recognize it, and to own the fact that it is out there. Protests do that.  
The Climate Academy has an important place in the history of the climate protest movement. On 
November 20th 2018, the students of the Climate Academy in Brussels organized a protest outside 
the European Commission building. It was the first protest in the world to number more than 1 
person. The 300+ students shouting on the Schuman Roundabout were chanting, “The Right to 
Know… The Right to Know”.  
They were making two key points:  
1) About words.  
Education and the media are failing to present the climate crisis properly. Everyone has the 
Right to Know how deep and how close the crisis is.  
2) About numbers.  
There is no reliable climate index to hold governments to account. We painted the CUTx 
numbers on various banners. People should know exactly what is happening above their 
heads.  
The students achieved wide press coverage; on the TV, in newspapers and on the radio.364 Their 
angry protests were heard across Belgium.  
 
364 For example: https://www.rtbf.be/article/there-is-no-planet-b-des-eleves-de-l-ecole-europeenne-de-
bruxelles-ii-manifestent-pour-le-climat-10077620 
