Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 319 
(BACK) 
 
Capital in the Twenty-First Century 
Capital functions like with a black hole. The bigger it gets, the 
more power it has to suck in surrounding, varied debris into 
its core. This pull of capital is not just relevant to financial 
assets, but to all of the diverse elements of a socio-economic 
system.  
The economics of this has been described with depth and 
clarity by Thomas Piketty in his groundbreaking book, “Capital 
in the Twenty-First Century” (2013). Again, for the record, 
Piketty is not a Marxist. His work is built on a studious survey 
of data that has nothing to do with Marx’s materialist 
dialectics.  
Piketty’s work has been described as “a theoretical and 
political bulldozer” of a book.408 It’s 696 pages describe how 
the concentration of wealth into smaller and smaller pockets 
of civilization has caused social and economic instability. 
Piketty argues that unless there is a redistribution of wealth 
through state intervention, the democratic order will be 
endangered. 
The British journalist and commentator Paul Mason noted that Piketty had "placed an unexploded 
bomb within mainstream, classical economics".409 The renowned Economist Branko Milanovic called 
the book "one of the watershed books in economic thinking.”410  
At the heart of his book is the simplest idea: r > g.  
For anyone with more time to read the 696 pages the expansive explanation of this root equation, 
they would notice the principles of the Adaptive Cycle at work. Not only at the level of economics, 
but through the easiest jumps of imagination and extrapolation, at the fuller systems level.  
The essential point is that, at this economic level, like at so many other levels, we are deeply into the 
teeth of a rigidity trap. The climate crisis is symptom of that trap. Our human systems are locked 
inside the final intense phase of ‘conservation’ (k) and are very close to flipping into a breakdown 
point (Ω).  
Which sounds like bad news. And it is.  
However.  
The thinker Ervin László argues in, “The Chaos Point” that the world and humanity is currently at a 
crossroads between breakdown and breakthrough. If we take appropriate actions, the chaos point 
could be an opportunity to “leap to a new civilization” (László, 2006: 109).”411 Indeed, inside 
 
408 Laurent Mauduit, "Piketty ausculte le capitalisme, ses contradictions et ses violentes inégalités", Mediapart, 
3 September 2013: "un bulldozer théorique et politique" 
409  "Thomas Piketty's Capital: everything you need to know about the surprise bestseller". The Guardian. 
London. Retrieved 1 May 2015. 
410 The return of "patrimonial capitalism": review of Thomas Piketty's "Capital in the 21st century", Munich 
Personal RePEc Archive. Retrieved April 20, 2014. 
411 Ibid.  
