Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 67 
(BACK) 
 
thinking is that an “Energy Transition” has been taking place. It has not. There has been no reduction 
in our dependency on fossil fuels towards non-emitting energy sources.  
No energy transition 
It is arguable that the phrase, “energy transition” should be banned. This is because it is often used to 
refer to something that is happening now. It isn’t. It has never been. It is something that we urgently 
need to do, but then, is the word “transition” appropriate? What is required is a transformation not a 
transition.    
Our continually increasing emissions are due to the fact that we are still meeting the large majority of 
our energy demands with fossil fuels. The chart on the right shows that 81% of all our energy is 
produced by either coal, oil or gas. These statistics are taken from the latest data of the International 
Energy Agency.  
This data also shows that wind and solar power has dramatically increased from around 110 Twh to 
over 1,580 Twh since 2005, a whopping 1,450% increase. However, increasing the size of an apple pip 
by 1,450% does not change much if it is in competition with slowly inflating Beach Ball or Hopper Ball98 
that had a sizeable head start. In fact, although the use of fossil fuels increased by a much smaller 
percentage, it outstripped green energy growth by 11 times in absolute terms.  
In COP21 in Paris, President Obama proudly underlined the “ambitious investments” [sic] that the USA 
had made in tackling climate change by talking about the size of his ‘apple pip’: “Over the last seven 
years, we’ve made ambitious investments in clean energy, and ambitious reductions in our carbon 
emissions. We’ve multiplied wind power threefold, and solar power more than twentyfold.”  
 
Graph 2: Courtesy of Homo Sapiens Foundation, OurFutureUncompromised.org 
 
 
Globally, wind, solar, hydro and all other renewable non-emittive energy sources still only account for 
4% of humanity’s energy supply. Nuclear Power, for all of its other complications, is at least carbon 
friendly, so we get to 9% with this included. Biomass (which is emittive and has great unsustainability 
issues) is about 10%.  
The impression that we might have, from casually observing solar panels on people’s roofs or wind 
turbines in the open fields by motorways, is that green energies are significantly replacing fossil fuels. 
Politicians may frequently cite their commitments to huge-percentage increases in green energy 
supplies.  
 
98 For those who have never met one, a Hopper Ball is that big orange bouncy thing with a grizzly face that could serve as 
decent symbol for the fossil fuel industry, especially as Donald Trump “digs coal”. 
