Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 340 
(BACK) 
 
In the words of the French Philosopher JP Sartre, “We are condemned to be free”. 
A modern school timetable, with all its separate subjects, makes it look like “Ethics” or “Religion” is a 
separate thing. It is taught in a separate room, at a separate time, with a separate teacher. At a 
certain age, it can be dropped, like a student might want to drop studying a foreign language, Art or 
Chemistry.  
Of course, we simply cannot drop being people with morality. The ethical dimension to our lives 
carries on, no matter what subject options or jobs we go on to pursue.  
And yet, some schools, some teachers, are nervous about addressing climate change beyond just 
encouraging students to pick up litter, or do more recycling, because “it is too political”. This is an 
especially common view of things in the USA and Australia.  
But what does that mean? Does this even make any sense?  
Do we then not teach about the Civil Rights Movement in History because that is also too political? 
Because if we were to speak about the protests and the fight for equitable laws, we would be 
effectively endorsing it all as a good thing? If schools are supposed to be value neutral, do we also 
jump over the moral aspects of World War 2? Is it wrong to take sides with respect to the 
Holocaust? Do we say that genocide is neither right nor wrong, it is just a personal choice? How do 
schools deal with bullies or violence in the classroom? Neutrally?  
Just the briefest moment of reflection demonstrates that schools, like the rest of life, are 
unavoidably political. They are unavoidably moral.  
So why are so many schools timid about climate change? Why is there a push back from certain 
people about the issue, on the grounds of “neutrality”? Why do we suddenly impose a barrier to 
shut down a deeper engagement?  
It is a truly weird response,429 430 and that is being polite.  
Just like we cannot opt out of an ethical life, neither can we pretend that all of our economic and 
social thinking and planning can carry on without any reference to the environment. Students who 
want to study Architecture at university, cannot choose that subject but opt for “Architecture 
without Physics”. The climate crisis is a super wicked one. The causes and solutions are wired into 
every level of our world.  
Our crisis is inescapably physical and metaphysical.  
It unavoidably involves questions of morality. It unavoidably involves politics.431  
The education in Plato’s Academy was a profoundly holistic one. We might not agree with him that 
the perfect symmetry of a circle is indicative of a wider harmony of values at a divine level. We might 
find Plato’s fusion of the physical and metaphysical rather bracing. However, if we reject this – we 
 
429 Well, there is a simple explanation. Some political parties deny that climate change is really a problem. 
There are a whole range of scientifically illiterate views behind this infantile fantasy. They are the ones who 
claim it is “political”. Surely schools have a responsibility to fight disinformation and improve scientific literacy?  
430 Indeed, those who claim that climate change should not be addressed with depth in schools  
431 One common complaint of the climate deniers is that it interferes with the “free market”, as if the free 
market were actually free.   
