Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 242 
(BACK) 
 
shrink back into a defensive mode and just point at “the need for jobs”, or “the protection of 
livelihoods”, thinking that they are the realists. I sometimes think that they would still be defending 
“the economy” when we are excavating 9000 billion tons of resources per year, on a planet of 90 
billion people, and their words are only just audible because they are spluttering, chin deep in 
industrial sludge.  
It would be nice if our planet were a few more cubic metres wide. Indeed, if the Big Bang would have 
spat things out slightly differently, we could have been lucky enough to have an Earth the size of 
rocky exo-planet BD+20594b – this ‘Super-Earth’, detected by the Kepler space telescope in 2016, is 
more than 17 times the mass of our home. 334 A bigger planet Earth for us, assuming that it would be 
identical in every other way, could have postponed the need for us to attend to problem of growth 
for a few more thousand years. But our planet, stubbornly, has a fixed radius. Or as Will Rogers 
famously quipped, “.. land, they ain’t making any more of it”.  
And so, in the great cosmic game of pass the parcel, the limits to our economic growth have landed 
in the lap of this generation of homo sapiens.   
….  
Some myths can take a long time to fade away.  
 
Just before setting off for our traditional family walk into a forest at Easter, away from the others, I 
approached my youngest son, bent down to his level, and told him an important truth: rabbits do 
not poop wrapped chocolate eggs at Easter. He was 8. I am all for magical thinking, but at some 
point, if the chocolate poop has not dropped in your brain, someone should tell you.  
 
Before teaching Philosophy, I taught World Religions, and in both subjects the deep value of myths is 
well understood.335 When exploring the mythology of Ganesh with 12 year old students, the “starter 
exercise” involved me inviting the class to reflect on their childhood belief that an obese bearded 
man would manage to gain entry to their house to gift them expensive presents for free, before 
flying off into the night sky to do the same thing for 7 billion other people (in one night). This playful 
introduction to questions of belief, ritual, and truth provoked a bit of laughter and led to important 
moments of deeper reflection about what they believed and why.  
 
However, the young boy sat right in front of me, Thomas (I will not forget his name), had been 
extremely quiet, and was not raising his hand. He was always a little timid, but when I glanced at 
him, I understood something more important. There was a little tear, waiting to drop off his nose, 
and he evidently did not want to draw attention to himself by wiping it away. Nobody else noticed, 
and by the end of class he had gathered himself; and after a little discreet chat he went off, happily 
enough, into the melee of the corridors.  
 
If we are courageous enough to look at the fundamental data of the planetary situation that we are 
in, then it becomes clear that when you add everything up, the current dogmatic commitment to 
“economic growth” is far too simplistic and delusional. Once your mind has travelled up tracks to see 
how unsustainable our “green growth” model is then it makes the lectern thumping “growth, 
growth, growth” of our political leaders sound like a child thumping the Christmas Eve dinner table 
shouting, “Santa, Santa, Santa”. GDP is not the gift that can keep on giving. Not even if we colour a 
few of those growths in green.  
 
334 https://exoplanet.eu/catalog/bd_20_594_b--2546/ 
335 Unless your surname name is Comte or Carnap.  
