Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 111 
(BACK) 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
When you put a booming human population and a booming ability to extract and manufacture 
products into a pot, the global heating of the planet is an entirely predictable outcome.  
As stated earlier, the term Anthropocene is a good start in capturing the profoundly destabilising 
impact that humans are having on the planet, but it is not sharp enough. Firstly, because not all 
humans are equally responsible, and secondly because it is not clear enough about the key 
mechanical feature of the destruction (unregulated capitalism).  
There is no need for extensive research to establish who is responsible for the climate crisis. The 
fingerprints of those nations who profited longest and deepest from capitalism are everywhere. 
Their economic expansion was powered by fossil fuels. And despite the widespread and delusional 
use of the word “transition”, it still is.185 
Some details are important: in 1825, Great Britain was responsible for a whopping 80% of global 
emissions. Tellingly, these were not predominantly emissions that came up from within the territory 
of Great Britain; they were emissions that mostly arose from investments that were made in the 
nations of the empire. Indeed, the British projected their fossil capitalism onto the whole world. 
They led the 19th century in establishing a second technological ‘layer’ to the planet. A layer that 
required, and still requires, fossil fuels to keep it going. The book, “Fossil Capital: The Rise of Steam 
Power and the Roots of Global Warming” (2015)186 provides more details. For example, merchant 
(steam) shipping fleet grew from 9 to 35 million between 1850 and 1900, and 60% of it was British; 
and the rail network that grew from 100,000 to 1 million kilometres between 1860 and 1920 was 
chiefly financed by private capital that had its hub in London.187  
Of course, the British were not alone in their push for larger capitalist markets. There was a peloton 
of advanced economic nations just behind, including the USA, the Dutch, French and Germans. 
Indeed, the Dutch East India company discovered the “fine spice” of nutmeg on island of Banda.188 
Then when they found that dealing with the indigenous population was troublesome, they beat 
them into a pulp in 1621.  
The former head of Economic Affairs at the UN put it like this, “The climate crisis is the result of the 
very uneven pattern of economic development that evolved over the past two centuries, which 
allowed today’s rich countries to attain their current levels of income, in part through not having to 
account for the environmental damage now threating the lives and livelihoods of others”.189  
 
185 As stated in Chapter One, “The Absolute Basics”, we are still reliant on fossil fuels for over 80% of our 
energy, to do anything. 
186 Andreas Malm, London, Verso (2015). 
187 Ibid, p238-9 
188 This savage flattening of a beautiful culture that lived with a deep love and respect for nature is told with 
compelling details by Amitav Ghosh; in “The Nutmeg’s Curse: Parables for a Planet in Crisis”. (University of 
Chicago Press. 2021.) 
189 Sha Zukang, (Foreword to) “Promoting Development, Saving the Planet.” UN, 2009.  
