Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 160 
(BACK) 
 
light257.)  The base assumptions also determine funding decisions and orientate the curiosity and 
imagination of the scientists into further areas of research.  
It is crucial to understand that a paradigm shift is not just a simple editing of content. For example, in 
the case of the Galileo controversy, the change in paradigm was not just about where to put the 
Earth in a diagram. The confirmation of the new model had monumental implications throughout 
both science and society at a deeply structural and symbolic level. The Copernican Revolution was so 
deep, it overturned many fundamental assumptions.  
There were many big headlines about the carnage caused by the new paradigm. To mention a few:  
• 
it demoted the Earth from the centre of meaning, to just some random rock in space. 
• 
it put a wrecking ball through the authority of the church to pronounce on scientific 
conclusions.  
• 
it was perceived to undermine scripture. 
• 
it shook up the old Aristotelean view that the material world was heading towards some 
kind of purpose (τέλος, telos).258  
These were all seismic movements in our cultural history.  
Interestingly, a reader will not find these headlines to be very dramatic at all. We might have to 
Google the word “Telos”. We might get a thrill from looking out at the stars at night in recognition of 
the seemingly infinite expanse of space. Maybe there is dark thrill in recognising our unanchored 
position in it all. The Bible may have only the faintest cultural relevance to you.  
But this gap underlines the crucial point: we live in an entirely new paradigm, a few revolutions 
further on from this Galilean controversy. It requires a lot of reading and imagination to put 
ourselves back into the social, political, scientific context of that time. It is like another world.  
It is like trying to understand a foreign language – it is not just the words that matter, there is a 
whole game involved. Every word performs in a cultural context that is alien to us. Anybody who has 
tried to do translation work understands how difficult it is to move authentically between languages. 
Anybody who is bilingual will be aware that certain experiences and feelings from one of their native 
cultures simply cannot be captured in their other native language.   
Kuhn has a word for this lack of translatability in science. It is not a word that would make it into 
many pop songs. It is the clunky word, “Incommensurability”. Or if we break the word into pieces, “a 
lack of a common measure”. Kuhn understands that if you were to line up the different paradigms 
that have occurred in the history of Physics, they simply would not be able to talk to each other. This 
lack of communication would not be a problem of accents. It would be a problem due to entirely 
different systems of thought. A paradigm shift is not like tinkering with some vocabulary of a 
language, it necessarily involves an overhaul of the entire grammar.  
Einstein’s Physics broke some fundamental principles of Newtonian Physics, which in turn were 
violated by Quantum Physics. These differences could never be reconciled, each paradigm of Physics 
is simply incomprehensible to the other. It is not that one paradigm is better than another, just as 
 
257 In a modern democratic society, the fundamental assumptions that frame everything else are principles like 
‘the rule of law’; in a relationship a basic background assumption would be, ‘we are in this together’.  
258 For a fuller analysis see, “Descartes Tackles Climate Change”.  
