Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 259 
(BACK) 
 
Introduction 
A strange new world 
We have all been through an existential crisis.  
It is called birth.  
For months, we all get to hang around in a safe, cosy womb. Surrounded by ambient noise and 
lighting, we don’t have anything to worry about. You can sleep in any position, at any time. There 
are no mealtimes to be met; you don’t even need to be bothered to chew, or to swallow, you are 
just plugged straight into a nutrient supply. Hell, this place is so good, you can even pee in your 
warm bath, and nobody is going to notice or complain.  
Then, suddenly, it is all over.  
A mysterious biological switch flicks. After months of nurturing, supporting and feeding, the 
mother’s body suddenly recognises that there is an alien object inside her. You. And so, the 
evacuation plan is enforced, with increasingly powerful and frequent contractions. It is a plan which 
demands that you exit through a remarkably narrow hole in the pelvis. You might get to have fun on 
water slides later in life, but they are nothing like this.  
Abruptly, you find yourself in a radically alien world. Everything is utterly different. You are now an 
object. A lone object. Your tight bundle of limbs is now suddenly free to kick out into an alarmingly 
empty space.  For every moment of your existence up to this point, you were an aquatic animal. 
Now, suddenly, you are land mammal. Out of instinct, panic, fear or shock; whatever, it is not 
surprising that most of us take the first moments of our life on planet Earth to test drive our lungs, 
with the music turned up to the max. 
Wanting to ball your eyes out. Having your biosphere fundamentally redesigned. Feeling deeply 
alien. These are not only features of what it is like to be born; they are also features of what is like to 
experience climate anxiety.  
If we pause a moment to reflect on the true proportions of the crisis, if we pull together into our 
imagination the main scientific facts and the key human consequences, the same vertiginous 
experience can kick in.  
The world is suddenly odd. This is an existential crisis. A radically new world is being born. 
To quote a line familiar to Trekkies, “It’s life Jim, but not as we know it”.351  Understanding the fuller 
reality of climate change is like being “born again”, it has some parallel psychological features to 
religious belief.352 The difference is that this understanding is rooted in scientific reasoning and 
evidence.353   
This is Chapter 14. There have been 13 Chapters prior to this that have mapped out the full scope of 
the crisis. It should be clear by now that the environmental crisis that we find ourselves in is not 
 
351 The line comes from the song, “Star Trekkin’” (1987), not from the original TV series.  
352 Colin Wilbourn’s sculpture, “The Upper Room” (1998) described in Chapter One provides a striking visual 
representation of this.  
353 This contrast between science and religion is not written to denigrate religious belief. A footnote, a 
paragraph, a chapter... would not be enough to articulate the different ways in which scientific and religious 
beliefs both contrast and overlap.  
