Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 354 
(BACK) 
 
The third and final Pillar of The Climate Academy is about Systems Entrepreneurship. This is because 
at the end of the day, an exit from the sustainability crisis will require a deep reimagining of the 
existing systems.  
At the crudest level, it is simply not possible to have a naïve division between private and public. It is 
not possible to pretend that the system of private economic wealth has got nothing to do with the 
system of public wealth of the atmosphere and the land. Advocates of the ‘free market’ (as if there 
were such a thing) often push back on government legislation as if it were some alien force, that has 
nothing to do with their exploitation of the natural world. Those private business that extract and 
emit with impunity do not want to admit that there are any consequences to human rights and 
public wealth by their actions.  
It is for this reason that the third pillar is not just labelled, “Social Entrepreneurship”. If The Climate 
Academy were to have this narrow label for the third pillar, then we would immediately be 
conceding far too much ground to private capitalist interests. What is the point in mucking around in 
some small corner of human civilisation, the bit left over after private interests have done whatever 
they want. Where is the leverage in that? Sustainability cannot be bullied into a corner like that. This 
is a complex systems problem, everything and everyone is involved, at every level.   
Framing the problem as something for nice people to be busy with is hopelessly limp. Framing the 
problem as just a slightly more modest, ‘recycled’ kind of capitalism is not going to cut it. Framing 
the problem as if it doesn’t include a deep examination and regeneration of every system – both 
human and natural, is delusional.  
We need Systems Entrepreneurship. We need 
to take a distance from the status quo and be 
brave enough to imagine a very different 
future.  
We need to think, act and innovate inside a 
quintuple helix.  
Plato’s Academy was profoundly holistic in its 
thinking. And if we do not frame our modern 
sustainability crisis in this fully holistic way, 
then our responses will be limited and lack the 
leverage required.  
 
 
 
The Quintuple Helix model of innovation440  
 
 
440 Carayannis, Elias G.; Barth, Thorsten D.; Campbell, David F. J. (2012-08-08). "The Quintuple Helix innovation model: 
global warming as a challenge and driver for innovation". Journal of Innovation and Entrepreneurship. 1 (1): 2. 
doi:10.1186/2192-5372-1-2. ISSN 2192-5372 
 
