Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 33 
(BACK) 
 
Introduction 
 
Spotting Mass Extinction Events 
 
Spotting mass extinction events is a surprisingly difficult thing to do. For a start, such events only 
happen about once every 750 million years, on average,22 so it is quite difficult to get any decent 
practice. Indeed, apart from the current extinction event, they all happened well before human beings 
landed on the planet - so we need the help of Geologists to see them. 
As a spectacular warm-up act23, the Earth was utterly transformed by tiny cyanobacteria 2.4-2.05 Ga 
(billion years ago)24. These microscopic organisms produced a chemical in vast quantities that was 
devastatingly toxic to most life forms. That chemical was oxygen. Of course, we are now very glad that 
these cyanobacteria had worked out the trick of photosynthesis. A decent level of oxygen in the 
atmosphere is rather important for us. But it was categorically not good news for over 90% of life on 
earth at the time, who could only function in anaerobic mode. This “Great Oxidisation Event” created 
the conditions for complex life on Earth to get started25. 
The biggest wipeout of the biosphere (in this advanced state) occurred approximately 251.9 million 
years ago26, it is often referred to rather starkly as “The Great Dying” (or more technically as the 
“Permian-Triassic Extinction Event”). It was caused by formidable level of volcanic activity that poured 
out over a billion cubic kilometres of lava in the Siberian Traps. The scorching temperatures that 
followed (globally) eliminated over 80% of all marine life27 and over 70% of all terrestrial life. If you 
would like to count, this was the third mass extinction event.  
 
The fifth one started in Mexico.  
 
More specifically, it kicked off in the Yucatan Peninsula. This is where a massive asteroid marked a 
massive full stop at the end of the dinosaurs’ paragraph of history, 66 million years ago (66.043 ± 
0.011 Ma). The poor old dinosaurs did not get much time to see the crisis coming. How could they? 
The Ampelosaurus had the biggest brain of all of them, but it was only the size of a tennis ball, and 
their club-like feet would also have made it difficult from them to grip a telescope.28  
 
 
22 The age of the Earth: 4.54 ± 0.05 billion years. However, it might be more relevant to start the clock at the first mass 
extinction event which was 444 million years ago because it took quite a while for life to evolve into complex forms. If we 
count 6 events, there are 5 periods in between, thus the average period between mass events has been 444 / 5 = 88.8 ~ 90 
million years.  
23 I write warm-up act, but as this paragraph is about the most significant cooling in planet Earth’s long history.  
24 B. E. Schirrmeister, J. M. de Vos, A. Antonelli, H. C. Bagheri. « Evolution of multicellularity coincided with increased 
diversification of cyanobacteria and the Great Oxidation Event ». Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2013 
25 Interestingly, these cyanobacteria were so successful in transforming the climate of the planet they actually rather over 
did it. The astonishing amounts of oxygen they produced through photosynthesis cooled the planet so much, they almost 
wiped themselves out with the dramatic drop in temperature.  
26 The combination of the use of the word “approximately” with a number as precise as 251.9million years 
demonstrates the advanced methods and technology of Geology and its healthy scientific modesty about its 
conclusions.  
27 Stanley, Steven M. (2016-10-18). "Estimates of the magnitudes of major marine mass extinctions in earth 
history". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 113 (42): E6325–E6334.   
28 www.bbc.co.uk/news/science-environment-61013740 
