Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 162 
(BACK) 
 
Conclusions 
And now we swing around to look at the climate crisis.  
Why all this attention to abstract frames and ideas? What value do these concepts and words have 
with the immediate, material problem of the climate?  
It is undeniably true that, in one sense, these truths are very remote. It is hard to imagine what 
relevance a dead American Philosopher called Kuhn has got for your life. It is a bit of a stretch to see 
why Galileo, from the far distant past, has got anything compelling to tell us about the present. Yet, 
by considering paradigms, it brings to the surface of our minds something powerful. The odd thing is 
that we live most intimately with the reality of our paradigms. Arguably, they are the most real thing 
we live with.  
A paradigm is the like the DNA of our thinking, it is the invisible stitching that pulls together all the 
different experiences that we have. We own it in such a deep way, it is difficult to see it. A paradigm 
shapes our dreams and ambitions, it sets up our expectations. Our paradigms fix what we feel as 
naturally good, they form our spontaneous reactions to experiences. We carry around these 
constellations of beliefs in our hearts and minds, and just like astrological charts are understood by 
some to fix the course of lives behind the scenes, these paradigms are invisible to our daytime 
thinking, but they determine our reactions and decision making.  
No-one is exempt from them. We don’t just “have experiences”, as unattached, singular, blobs of 
data. We are not just blinking goldfish.259  
We will not wake up thinking about the publication date of Kuhn’s book.  Nor will we  become 
preoccupied by the stress endured by Galileo during his Inquisition. But these people and their work 
can point to the frameworks that exist inside our own heads. And by learning to see those 
frameworks, we can understand the contents of our hearts and minds so much better.  
A perceptive and skilful psychologist can help us see patterns in our behaviour and thinking that 
would otherwise be hidden. A language teacher brings to the surface the rules of grammar that we 
have used since our earliest years but had no clue nor care about.  
Indeed, we are all born into a set of values and expectations, like we are all born into a language. We 
learn to talk and play in that language well before we ever understand the invisible governing 
principles of how it all works. An understanding of that grammar provides us with the capacity to 
learn and then function in another system of language – with all the extra agility and depth that this 
provides.    
Just having the word, “paradigm” in our vocabulary helps us reflect on ourselves and our world with 
more probity. Thinking about paradigms enables us to see things that are, paradoxically, too close to 
see. 
 
259 This is neither a bit of slang, nor a well-researched biological statement.  
