Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 298 
(BACK) 
 
scale of the suffering was so immense, it broke the symbolic order. It made what used to seem 
natural and permanent, look weird and alien. Athens had fallen, and the stability and sense of life 
had been brutally shaken up.  
 
This is the first of the two major incidents in Plato’s life. It will illustrate the parallel problems that 
we are confronted by.  
The second incident will feature in Chapter 16. The final, upward facing chapter, on ‘solutions’. 
d) The Boom and The Bust  
So, what might we learn from this Athenian tragedy? What might his bust tell us?   
The first thing to underline here is the fact from within any highly successful regime, it is hard to 
imagine that such a situation could actually fall apart. Human psychology rewards the status quo 
with an impression of permanence, both in good times and in bad. The Athenians had it good. They 
were the most technologically, culturally and socially advanced society of the time. And they had a 
massive military capacity to emphasize the point.  
It was simply inconceivable to them that their civilization could collapse.  
This begs several questions. Are we prepared, surrounded by booming technological progress, to 
actually consider the possibility that our civilisation might collapse? Are the wealthiest nations of our 
world ready to look beyond the surface of that progress, and face up to the underlying numbers? 
There is a deep cognitive dissonance between the fact that our material economic growth is, at the 
same time, undermining the stability of our civilization.  
This is not easy to look at.  
How could a happy children’s party with beefburgers, biscuits and balloons be in any way connected 
with the fact that sea level rises will put millions of communities underwater? Evil normally has a 
macabre, ugly face, not a smiley one. How can a romantic honeymoon flight to a tropical island, be 
part of the reason that the same island will become unliveable? Love is transcendent and 
redeeming, so the link with such awful material loss is not comfortable to make. Can the circulation 
of products around the globe that makes us happy, actually stop the circulation of the massive 
AMOC? It is so incongruous to think that the movement of goods, such as medical supplies and pet 
food, could throw the stable circulation of global weather systems into chaos?388 Of course, no one 
individual act is responsible for such outcomes. But in our current system, those links are there.389 
Are we willing to recognize the fact that both historic and current emissions, biodiversity loss and 
resource extractions have been overwhelmingly caused by democracies? Can we really imagine that 
our banal human activities could flip the Earth into a hostile planet? What have open, tolerant 
 
388 In July 2023, a paper from a pair of University of Copenhagen researchers suggested that AMOC collapse would most 
likely happen around 2057, with the 95% confidence range between 2025 and 2095. Ditlevsen, P., Ditlevsen, S. Warning of 
a forthcoming collapse of the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation. Nat Commun 14, 4254 (2023). 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-39810-w  
389 This issue is explored more extensively in ‘Arendt Tackles Climate Change’ (2024). The thinker Hannah Arendt 
established her reputation through her brilliant analysis of Adolf Eichmann (on trial in Jerusalem) (196”). She wrote about 
‘the banality of evil’ & in the case of climate change, it is not just that the things that we do are banal – some of them are 
even wonderful, and yet, they cause such awful consequences.  
