Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 51 
(BACK) 
 
 
Major talks are now quite rightly taking place to close the two ends of our linear economy to create 
a circular  one. This loop takes what is waste material in one industry or sector and feeds it as a 
resource into another. The circular economy also reduces waste through recycling. This 
improvement to our economic model is an important step, but there are two major problems.  
 
The first problem is a practical one, and that is that only 8.6 % of material is currently recycled71, and 
this amount is decreasing. In principle this is fixable; however the second problem is more 
fundamental, and it is a problem of thermodynamics again.  Even if the efficiency and recycling 
processes are radically improved, you will need even more energy to re-extract resources from 
waste; and with the principle of Entropy in the background, the energy requirement for some will be 
prohibitive.  
 
The final good news is that although we live in a closed mass system, we are very much open to 
energy. And with luxurious excess. This energy is poured into our system by the Sun’s radiant beams 
every day. It is an energy that is diffuse; it is not compacted and focused like the intense implosion of 
a supernova. However, even though it cannot provide us with nuggets of gold, chunks of copper, 
lumps of lithium or banks of phosphorus, it has another five billion years of its own well stocked 
resources to satisfy our basic needs.  
 
 
Resource Extraction 
 
The main consideration of this module is concerned about what this growing population is doing on 
the surface of the Earth. The answer to that question has changed dramatically in the last 250 years; 
and that drama has taken on truly epic proportions in the last 50 years (‘The Great Acceleration’). 
However, for a proper perspective on these last explosive decades of human history, we need to 
zoom out to a much wider vantage point.   
 
For hundreds of thousands of years, people lived in a more or less sustainable way with nature as 
hunter gatherers. Our subsistence lifestyle could be summarised as one unit of labour that had the 
capacity to produce one unit of goods. During our time as agriculturists, with the extra horsepower 
at hand from animals and wind, our productivity doubled to two units of goods.  
 
If we briefly pause at this junction in the development of human civilisation, we can find a 
powerfully symbolic text. The biblical story of the twins, Cain and Abel72 (Genesis 4) points at the 
tension between the settled life that emerges out of agriculture (Cain), and the roaming pastoral life 
(Abel). It is the humble offering of the shepherd, Abel, that God prefers. However, after Cain 
murders his brother, it is his more organised and fixed way of life that prevails.  
 
Or we could say in more familiar terms – it is the urban that comes to dominate the rural.  
 
There are of course, many layers to the mythical text about the first sons of Adam and Eve. But it is 
telling that after the murder of Abel, God still gives his protective ‘mark’ to Cain – who within a few 
lines of verse has already started to build the city of Enoch. It is as if  divine wisdom decrees that the 
 
71 The Circularity Gap Report 2022 
72 The ancient Sumerian myth, ‘Inanna prefers the Farmer’ (https://etcsl.orinst.ox.ac.uk/section4/tr40833.htm) 
predates the Biblical text. This powerful and often illuminatingly erotic text also depicts the fundamental 
struggle between the  farmer and the herdsmen, and (eventually) the urban and the rural.   
