Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 39 
(BACK) 
 
born with is soon filled with fear and rage as he struggles to understand his place in the world. As 
the tragic tale of loss unfolds, we are left to wonder at the subplot to all of our victories over nature.   
 
The mushroom cloud is a potent symbol of the dark underside of scientific knowledge. If we ever lost 
control of “Oppenheimer’s deadly toy” 51 a bleak, definitive radioactive line would settle into the 
strata of the Earth during the quiet winter that would follow. A nuclear apocalypse would be an 
astonishing finale to human life on Earth. 
 
The mushroom clouds that surged up over the cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945 could still 
turn out to be a definitive image of our age. Indeed, our ability to harness atomic power has 
advanced much further since then. The explosion triggered on October 30th 1961 when the Soviet 
Union detonated their ‘Tsar Bomba’ over the Novaya Zemlya Island demonstrated an entirely 
different level of power. This RDS-220 Hydrogen bomb had the capacity to release 100Mt of nuclear 
energy, the equivalent of 7600 Hiroshima A-Bombs.  
 
Indeed, in the early, heady days of nuclear power52 some rather imprudent plans were proposed by 
the USA. The ‘Father of the H-Bomb’, Edward Teller, championed ‘Project Plowshare’ (PP) - a set of 
proposals that sought to use the new technology in various construction projects. The plans included 
the use of 300 bombs to create a second Panama Canal through Nicaragua, nicknamed the ‘Pan-
Atomic Canal’ and the use of 764 bombs to blast a new canal through Columbia. They even proposed 
a 22 A-bomb plan to make a hole through the Bristol mountains of the Mojave Desert for Interstate 
40 (‘Project Carryall). Teller wrote an article in ‘Popular Mechanics’ entitled, “We are going to work 
miracles”.  
 
Thankfully, none of these projects to domesticate nuclear bombs ever went further than a desk. And 
although Vladimir Putin stirred up the nightmares of thermonuclear war with his genocidal invasion 
of Ukraine in 2022, we have so far avoided this M.A.D. conclusion to human life. Nuclear physics is 
here, the toothpaste cannot be put back into the tube. Given the acutely difficult timeframes of the 
climate crisis, these horror stories must not distract us from the safe potentials of that 
understanding. The case for massive investment in fusion technology remains a strong one. 53 
 
Either way, when the International Commission on Stratigraphy (ICS) meet to decide on when and 
where to draw the lines in geological time – they have a basic technical requirement that the change 
must be evident in the strata of the Earth’s crust.  
 
Nuclear deposits help meet this condition.  
 
 
Planetary Boundaries 
 
Plugging our brains into realities as big as Mass Extinction Events or new geological epochs such as 
the Anthropocene can be rather overwhelming. These are seismic changes and big concepts to 
wrestle with. A sharper, more defined image has been provided in the acclaimed research, compiled 
 
51 Sting, “Russians” (1985). 
52 Mostly before the ‘Partial Test Ban Treaty’ came into force 1963.  
53 If Nuclear Physicists could crack the puzzle of triggering nuclear fusion in a domesticated way, that would open up a 
revolutionary clean power source. However, despite recent advances, this technology remains a distant dream - and later 
chapters will underline just how short the timescales are for reducing our emissions.      
