Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 341 
(BACK) 
 
must not make the opposite mistake and pretend to ourselves that we can simply sideline questions 
of value. Neither for ourselves, nor for schools.  
 
 
Sorry again, children of 2100. We didn’t want to upset anyone by wrestling with the tough questions 
of climate change. We thought it better to stay “neutral” whilst emissions accelerated towards 
catastrophic tipping points.  
 
 
3. The need to see the shape of things 
So much of modern education on the environment has no structure or shape to it. It does not 
require or invite students to ask questions about what the fundamental issues are. There are 
thousands of resources, books, projects that are “green”, but all these details often leave the most 
important questions untouched.  
If students do see statistics about sustainability, they are rarely put into perspective with the 
defining issues. Schools have a weird fetish about controlling plastic waste and recycling projects. 
Who is going to be brave enough to call this out, given that it feels so virtuous to everyone involved? 
Who is going to ask the hard question about the relative importance of increasing recycling by 
3000% in a school building compared with the changes required in the infrastructure of our minds 
and economies.  
Proportion matters. Context matters.  
In a Geography class, if the teacher is talking about the “green energy transition”, have they pointed 
out that it has never ever happened before, and it is not likely to start happening in the next few 
years?432 It is no use pointing at increasing number of solar panels if that progress is, and always has 
been, outflanked by fossil fuel energy demand. The word transition is arguably one of the worst 
misnomers in the public awareness of the crisis. It is arguably one of the deepest psychological ruts 
that we are stuck in. It is somehow unimaginable that all the extra green things around have not yet 
started to stop the acceleration in overall emissions. (The key details can be found in Chapters 4, 7 
and 13).  
This author would ban the use of the word transition in any public space until it actually started 
happening.433  
It is a blizzard of numbers and statistics out there.  
In the absence of the clarity that the CUTx index provides, it is truly difficult to see the relative 
importance of any other green numbers. The national data points of CUTx (that are measured 
authoritatively to the remaining carbon budget), any local, corporate, governmental or global 
numbers can be usefully measured.   
 
432 A wonderfully direct and comprehensive account of this modern deception was written by Jean-Baptiste 
Fressoz, “More and More and More. An All-Consuming History of Energy”. Penguin, Random House (2024). 
433 This is of course, ironic. But something has to be done to highlight what a misleading  
