Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 306 
(BACK) 
 
At the very start of the ‘Republic’, Socrates is warmly welcomed when the group of friends get to 
Cephalus’ house in The Piraeus (by line 328b), but the conversation immediately gets dragged into 
all sorts of worldly concerns.  
It is revealing that Socrates finds it very difficult to make progress beyond the surface of this rich 
man’s thinking. He is just full of clichés. 
Socrates pursues him for a good understanding of what ‘Justice’ is, but he can’t pull Cephalus 
beyond a simple, transactional view of human life. Cephalus chucks out a few throwaway comments 
(that Socrates dismantles with ease) it is obvious that the old man is just not interested in those 
kinds of questions, and so he goes off to the garden to make his daily offerings to the gods.  
The message is clear: he is happy, he is a traditional guy, and Socrates should just calm down, follow 
the customs of Athens and relax a bit. Socrates is asking too many questions for his comfort. 
The twist  
What any ancient Athenian reader of the text knows is that by the time this book is written by Plato, 
the real Cephalus was dead. He had been dead for 24 years, and Plato is bringing him back to life and 
onto the stage to make a point. Cephalus had been very wealthy, up until the war with Sparta. 
However, he lost all of his property after the crushing defeat to their enemies.  
In the fullest sense of the word, Cephalus was a loser.  
In climate change public debate, this pushing away of reason is an easy 
gesture to make. Votes can be won by appearing to be ‘pragmatic’ and 
by appealing to moderate, practical thinking. Populist or libertarian 
commentators often caricature environmental activists as irrational 
dreamers, by setting up a false opposition between ideals and 
practicalities. They talk as if they are the pragmatists, standing in 
contrast to the unreasonable ideologues – not the other way around. 
“It’s the economy, stupid!” is supposed to stop a debate about climate 
change with a face slap.  
Those who understand the full picture of climate science, find it incomprehensible that the crisis is not 
a primary concern of election campaigns. Equally, capitalist market forces crop out external costs to 
the primary business of making profits.  
As noted in the previous chapter, someone suffering from climate anxiety could easily be triggered 
when noticing that a packet of ginger biscuits in a supermarket, has been manufactured with palm oil. 
Just for the sake of a cheaper biscuit (and there are just billions of biscuits sat on shelves everyday 
with that ingredient) vast swathes of pristine rainforest have been felled, each square kilometre of 
which was teeming with life. And in their place, long barren lines of palm oil trees now stand in sterile 
silence. It is one pack of biscuits, but it illustrates the failure of both democracies and markets to 
include deeply precious externalities in their decision making.   
So, the two dominant systems of the modern UHD world, democracy and capitalism, are both simply 
not wired to handle the crisis. They have no effective brake system to stop booming 
overconsumption397. This is not to ignore other benefits or defects of each system, it is clear that a 
 
397 See Chapter 8 on “Physical Tipping Points” that starts in the velodrome.    
