Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 352 
(BACK) 
 
Climate Academy simply assumes that its students are committed to minimizing the carbon 
emissions of their life and pushes forward to develop new narratives that put the fun into the 
fundamentals.  
Having now established the importance of being disruptive, of asking the key questions and being 
committed to the civic space, the only remaining issue is to simply identify how that can be made 
real.  
The second pillar of the Academy has two branches: Publications and Events.  
Each of these branches has a separate certification pathway. The Climate Academy is continually 
developing “off the shelf” projects for students to engage in, whilst being both curious and highly 
motivated to see students create their own variations and new ideas.  
 
Publications 
There is no faster or deeper way of developing your understanding than by being civically engaged, 
through publishing articles, podcasts or videos. These publications can also be as simple as an email 
to advocate for a climate law, policy or action.  
They can also be as temporary as a banner created for a protest march, or as permanent as a mural. 
For example, The Climate Academy in Brussels developed a project called 
www.thewritingsonthewall.org which combined all kinds of scientific and cultural aspects of the 
crisis.  
 
Events  
There are almost endless possibilities of events to bring the central truths of the systemic 
understanding of Pillar One into the public space.  
Chapter 14 on Climate Anxiety underlined the power of organizing protests– especially ones that 
have many layers of interaction in them. Such events have real power, both in the moment and also 
because of their long-term reach. The EU’s Green Deal is arguably a result of the series of major 
protests that happened prior to the lock downs of COVID-19.  
More traditionally, a Climate Academy student can organize a peer-teaching lesson to a Geography 
class about tipping points, or an Economics class about the limits to growth. This peer teaching can 
be extended to Climate Academy students setting up and leading their own Academy for younger 
students in the school, in which they guide them through the 16 chapters and support them in 
organizing events and publications.   
Climate Academy events can also involve the wider school community. For example, an evening with 
an expert guest speaker who shares the stage with the students, to open up the systems perspective 
in depth. These events can create liminal moments that open up parts of the brain and heart that 
are otherwise very difficult to touch. In a Climate Academy team there could be some who speak, 
some who design posters, others involved in the logistics and others who perform music or drama. 
In short, it is playtime. 
 
 
