Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 72 
(BACK) 
 
 
David was a master painter. In fact, he is ranked amongst the very greatest artists of all time. And so 
it should go without saying - he has certainly not made some kind of childish mistakes. The fact is 
that David has framed The Tennis Court Oath like this very deliberately. Indeed, the empty space is 
exactly what you are supposed to be looking at.  
 
There is even someone pointing to it.  
 
This man, whose face is in the bullseye of the picture, is Jean Sylvain Bailly - the Mayor of Paris in the 
revolutionary year of 1789.  
 
But what is he pointing at?  
 
This is an awkward question as to name this thing above their heads necessarily means that it will 
get clumsily simplified. Great art thrives on holding together different meanings in suspension. The 
naming of the main object of this painting would be a bit like lifting the lid on the box labelled 
“Schrodinger’s Cat” and thereby kill it.  
 
Our analysis, however, has to start somewhere.  
 
An ideal 
 
What Bailly is pointing to is an idea, or more significantly, an ideal. It is something that equalises 
everyone who has a part to play underneath it. If we really push the description of the object of this 
painting into something very specific, then what Bailly is pointing at here could be summed up with 
the word, “democracy” and all the family of values that go with it. It is the most dominating, visible 
and invisible, aspect of the painting.  
 
The Tennis Court that David has painted here is in the old village Versailles on the outskirts of Paris. 
It is just near the famous Palace that housed the King and Queen of France in such opulence. It is the 
location of the first scene in a very dramatic story. An assembly of people have gathered, and 
something has flipped the atmosphere into a highly energised state. Something momentous is 
happening. The energy in the room is billowing the curtains, it is turning umbrellas inside out. It is an 
energy that has really got the crowds going.  
 
Very specifically, The Tennis Court Oath captures the trigger moment of the French Revolution.   
 
The air is filled with the noble gases of freedom, equality and brotherhood. Admittedly, chemists 
would rightly remind us that noble gases are inert105. However, the noble gases of democracy in 
evidence here were really certainly not inert. They were highly reactive, as France was about to find 
out.106  
 
 
105 The noble gases were identified and given a group identity in 1902. They were added together as a group to 
the Periodic table by Mendeleev under the number “0”.  
106 As a rather tragic metaphor, the celebrated French Chemist Antoine Lavoisier described the combustibility 
of oxygen for the first time, he reported his findings to the French Academy on20th October 1772. However, 
his shady connections with different types of corruption with the ancien regime led to his life dramatically 
imploding in 1794. He was executed during the Reign of Terror for his “defrauding of the state” through taxes 
and the adulteration of tobacco.  
