Matthew Pye © 2025   
PAGE 22 
(BACK) 
 
ability to use reason to join up dots of evidence provides us with access to something that is going on 
above our heads.  
Despite the abstractness of these conclusions, the truth is that this reality will impose itself on human 
life with an intolerable level of violence and disruption. Global warming is a brute fact, whether we 
are willing to look at it or not. The earlier we engage with it, the earlier we deal with it, the better 
chances we have of avoiding its most destructive effects.  
 
 
Living in Flatland 
The English school master Edwin Abbott Abbott [sic] was very, very [sic] aware of the limits of human 
perception. Being a good teacher, he wanted to pass this ignorance on to his students.  
He wrote about his limited understanding in a short little book named “Flatland” (1884). This book is 
narrated by “A Square”. Taken at surface value, it is about a two-dimensional shape who gets into real 
difficulties when he visits different dimensions. Firstly, A Square has a disturbing dream about a visit 
to “Lineland” in which no-one can recognise who he truly is because they just see him as a sequence 
of dots. In fact, the monarch of “Lineland” feels so threatened by the absurd notion of an extra 
dimension, that an attempt is made to kill him.  
Then, after waking up from this awful dream, things  become more disturbing.  
A Square encounters A Sphere. And so, in a shocking twist, the problem is reversed. No matter how 
hard A Square tries, he just cannot understand what A Sphere is talking about. A Sphere tries to show 
the depth of the 3-dimensional world that he comes from, but all A Square can see is a series of linear 
circles and ovals.  
That is until he visits Space Land.  
In Space Land he comes to understand how limited his previous experience was. After seeing the 
deeper dimensions to existence, he returns to his native Flatland. Predictably, his insights are not 
accepted and suppressed by those in power. However, A Square cannot unseeunsee what he has seen, 
and he insists that his claims about a third dimension are true. Towards the end of the novella, A 
Square tries to convert his Grandson to the ‘Gospel of 3 dimensions’ but his attempt to explain the 
radical difference between going ‘Up’ and going ‘North’ is a futile one, as he cannot point to it in two-
dimensional space. 
The ‘Grand Council of Flatland’ eventually arrests him for his subversive attempt to challenge the 
status quo. It is during his imprisonment that “Flatland” is written, in the hope that it “may stir up a 
race of rebels who will refuse to be confined to limited Dimensionality”. 
Although Abbott’s book is quite funny, it was not just a bit of mental acrobatics about lines, shapes 
and dimensions. There were psychological and political angles to his book. He was offering a critique 
